

Madras High Court

The Indian Performing Rights vs Branch Manager on 3 March, 2009

    
    
           
    
      
    
      
    
     
     
     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    
    DATE: 3.3.2009.
    
    CORAM
    
    THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE M.JEYAPAUL
    
    O.A. No.1318 of 2008
    and
    Application No.37 of 2009
    in
    O.A.No.1318 of 2008
    in
    C.S.No.1180 of 2008
    
    O.A.No.1318 of 2008
    
    The Indian Performing Rights 
      Society Limited,
    a Company incorporated under the
    Companies Act, 1956 having its 
    Administrative Office at 
    Flat No.D1, 2nd Floor,
    Parsn Paradise,
    Residential Apartments, 
    109, G.N. Chetty Road,
    T.Nagar, Chennai 600 017.
    Registered Office: 
    208, Golden Chambers,
    New Andheri Link Road,
    Andheri (West) Oshiwara
    Mumbai 400 050 
    through its authorised
    representative cum Chairman
    Mr.Hasan Kamaal acting 
    on behalf of and 
    for the Company					Applicant
    
    	vs. 
    
    1. Branch Manager,
       The Muthoot Finance 
    	Private Limited,
       Old No.6, New No.21,
       Arunachalam Road,
       Opp.S.S.R.Pankajam Theatre,
       Saligramam, Chennai.
    
    2. Branch Manager,
       The Muthoot Finance 
    	Private Limited,
       AC-7, II Avenue,
       Anna Nagar, Chennai 600 040.
    
    3. Muthooth Finance Private Limited,
       Muthooth Chambers,
       Opp.Saritha Theatre Complex,
       Banerji Road, 
       Kochi 682 018. Kerala.
    
    4. Muthooth Finance Private Ltd.,
       Muthoot Buildings,
       P.B.No.11, Kozhencherry 689 641.
       Kerala. 						Respondents

A.No.37 of 2009 Muthooth Finance Private Limited, Muthooth Chambers,
Opp.Saritha Theatre Complex, Banerji Road, Kochi 682 018. Kerala. Applicant
vs.

1\. The Indian Performing Rights Society Limited, a Company incorporated under
the Companies Act, 1956 having its Administrative Office at Flat No.D1, 2nd
Floor, Parsn Paradise, Residential Apartments, 109, G.N. Chetty Road, T.Nagar,
Chennai 600 017.

Registered Office:

208, Golden Chambers, New Andheri Link Road, Andheri (West) Oshiwara Mumbai
400 050 through its authorised representative cum Chairman Mr.Hasan Kamaal
acting on behalf of and for the Company.

2\. Branch Manager, The Muthoot Finance Private Limited, Old No.6, New No.21,
Arunachalam Road, Opp.S.S.R.Pankajam Theatre, Saligramam, Chennai.

3\. Branch Manager, The Muthoot Finance Private Limited, AC-7, II Avenue, Anna
Nagar, Chennai 600 040.

4\. Muthooth Finance Private Ltd., Muthoot Buildings, P.B.No.11, Kozhencherry
689 641.

    
    
       Kerala. 						Respondents		
    	
    	For Applicant/
    	  plaintiff	   : Mr.Sriram Panchu, Senior Counsel
    					for Mr.P.Meghana Nair
    
    	For R3/D3		   : Mr.Paul Jacob for
    					Mr.Manoj Sreevalsan
    	
    COMMON ORDER
    

O.A.No.1318 of 2008 is filed seeking an order of temporary injunction
restraining the respondents and their agents from in any manner communicating
any of the musical and literary works of the members of the applicants in the
form of broadcast on their private FM Radio Stations. Application No.37 of
2009 is filed by the third respondent seeking to vacate the order of ad
interim injunction granted in O.A.No.1318 of 2008.

2\. The applicant/plaintiff is a Co-operative Society registered under section
33 of the Copyright Act, 1957. The applicant was permitted to carry on
business in musical and literary works. The Government of India through the
Registrar of Copyrights has issued to the applicant a certificate of
registration. The respondents are engaged in the business of broadcasting
private FM (Frequency Modulation) Radio Station in the city of Chennai in the
name of Chennai Live 104.8 FM. The applicant is affiliated to 194 World
Societies of authors and composers. The members of the applicant comprised of
authors and composers and publishers of Indian Musical and Literary works have
executed deeds of assignment assigning their public performing rights in
respect of their musical work. The owners of copyright in musical and literary
work in respect of a recorded song are entitled to receive royalty as and when
the sound recording is communicated to the members of the public. The
applicant has also been authorised to grant licence and collect royalties and
licence fee on behalf of its members for use and exploitation of the
copyrights by means of broadcast, telecast or public performance to the public
at large.

3\. It is alleged by the applicant that the respondents have started
broadcasting the recorded songs on their FM Radio Stations in respect of which
the members of the applicant owned copyright in relation to musical and
literary work. The respondents cannot use or exploit the copyrights of the
members without duly obtaining licence from the applicant paying necessary
licence fee/royalty for such use and exploitation. Unless the respondents are
restrained from broadcasting any of the music and literary works of the
members of the applicant in the form of broadcast, the applicant would suffer
loss, harm and injury, it is further alleged.

4\. It is the contention of the third respondent that the third respondent had
already entered into an agreement dated 4.6.2008 with Phonographic Performance
Limited (PPL), a copyright Society registered under section 33(2) of the
Copyright Act, 1957. PPL has been duly assigned the rights by the first owners
of the copyright of music being played by Chennai Live. The third respondent
also entered into private agreements with other owners of copyrights who are
not members of PPL. The applicant has been granted licence to issue licence
for performing rights only. But, the respondent is not in the business of
performing music. Therefore, the respondent is not required to enter into any
agreement with the applicant. The producer Companies mentioned in the list
produced by the applicant are also members of the registered Co-operative
Society viz., PPL which has already granted broadcasting licence to the
respondents to conduct its business. Therefore, the third respondent would
submit that grave prejudice will be caused to the respondent if the ad interim
order of injunction already granted remains in force.

5\. The point that arises for determination is whether the applicant has
established a prima facie case that the third respondent has got no right to
broadcast the songs through its FM Station with the agreement of assignment it
has entered into with Phonographic Performance Limited (PPL) without obtaining
separate licence from Indian Performance Rights Limited (IPRS).

6\. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the applicant would submit that the
literary and musical work is a separate class of work from that of sound
recording. Whereas learned counsel appearing for the third respondent would
vehemently submit that the literary and musical work merges with the sound
recording work.

7\. There is no dispute to the fact that there are two Copyright Societies
viz., Indian Performing Rights Society (IPRS), the applicant herein and the
Phonographic Performance Limited (PPL) registered under section 33(3) of the
Copyright Act, 1957. Under section 33(1) of the Copyright Act, 1957, there is
a bar for any person or association of persons to carry on business of issuing
licence in respect of any copyright without the registration under section
33(3) of the Act. The applicant Society has been registered to carry on
business of granting licence in respect of copyrights involved in any work
under section 33(3) of the Copyright Act, 1957. There is no dispute to the
fact that Phonographic Performance Limited is also a Society registered under
section 33(3) of the Act. Both of them have been issued certificate of
registration under the aforesaid provision of law by the Government of India.

8\. Copyright shall subsist in three classes of works viz.,

a) original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work;

b) cinematographic films; and

c) sound recording as contemplated under section 13 of the Act.

It is pertinent to note that the legislature, in its wisdom, has classified
sound recording as a separate class of work from that of literary and musical
work. The copyright in a sound recording shall not affect the separate
copyright in any work in respect of which a sound recording is made as per
sub-section 4 of section 13 of the Act. The separate classification of
literary and musical work as contemplated under section 13(1) has been
emphasised under section 13(4) of the Act.

9\. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the applicant would submit that
broadcasting of the songs by the third respondent through its FM station would
amount to performance of the work in public. But, the learned counsel
appearing for the third respondent would contend that the applicant has got
right to issue licence for performing rights only. The third respondent, who
is not in the business of performing music, does not in any way intrude into
the domain of the applicant.

10\. In case of literary or musical work, copyright means an exclusive right
to perform the above work in public or to communicate it to the public. What
is 'communication to public' is defined under section 2(ff) of the Act.
'Communication to the public' means making any work available for being seen
or heard or otherwise enjoyed by the public directly or by any means of
display. Therefore, performing literary or musical work in public does not
only mean a musical performance in a public place. Broadcasting of the songs
involves communication of the music to the public which is heard and enjoyed
by them. Therefore, the submission made by the learned counsel appearing for
the respondent that the right accrued to the applicant to issue licence for
performing the literary or musical work is confined only to performing music
in the public view stands rejected.

11\. It is submitted by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the applicant
that the applicant being an assignee of the copyright by its members under the
deed of assignment, can freely plunge into action for copyright without
arraying the first owner of the copyright.

12\. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the third respondent would
contend that there is a statutory bar under section 61 of the Copyright Act to
lay a suit without impleading the original owner of the copyright.

13\. It is true that under section 61 of the Copyright Act, no civil suit can
be laid by an exclusive licensee, unless the owner of the copyright is made a
defendant in the suit. Firstly, the applicant has shown prima facie before the
court that the applicant is only an assignee of the copyright by its members
and not an exclusive licensee as contemplated under section 61 of the
Copyright Act. The applicant has got assignment under section 18 of the
Copyright Act and not licence from the owner of the copyright under section 30
of the Copyright Act.

14\. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents cited the judgment of
the Supreme Court in ESPN STAR SPORTS v. GLOBAL BROADCAST NEWS LIMITED AND
OTHERS (CDJ 2008 DHC 156). That was a case where the plaintiff, contending
that it had obtained the sole and exclusive licence from various sports
bodies, laid a civil action for infringement of copyright. In the factual
background of the above case, the Supreme Court held that the suit was not
maintainable as the owner of the Copyright in an action initiated by the
exclusive licensee was not made a party as mandated under section 61 of the
Copyright Act. The above ratio does not apply to the fact situation of this
case where an assignee and not a licensee has approached this court seeking
the relief under the Copyright Act without arraying the assignor of the
copyright.

15\. It is submitted further by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
applicant that the applicant, being assignee of the copyright of its members,
has got right of administration of such rights. Therefore, any violation of
the right assigned can be challenged before the court of law by the applicant,
it is submitted.

16\. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent would submit
that only the owner of the copyright can seek civil remedies for infringement
of copyright under section 55 of the Copyright Act, 1956.

17\. A Copyright Society, which has got certificate of registration as per
section 33 of the Act can enter into an agreement with the copyright owners
authorising it to administer any right in the work by assignment of licence or
collection of licence fee or both. The Copyright Society may also issue
licence under section 30 in respect of any rights under the Act. It can also
collect fee in pursuance of such licence granted. The rights of the owner of
copyright is administered by the Copyright Society in terms of the agreement
entered into by the Society and its members who have authorised the Society to
administer any right in work. The registered Copyright Society, being
assignee, steps into the shoes of the copyright owner and can very well seek
the remedies invoking the provision under section 55 of the Copyright Act.
Further, even an exclusive licensee is empowered to lay suitable proceedings
for infringement of copyright under section 61 of the Act. Therefore, the
assignee of copyright has got every right not only to administer the copyright
assigned to it but also to safeguard the right given to it by the owner of the
copyright.

18\. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent cited yet another
decision in INDIAN PERFORMING RIGHT SOCIETY LIMITED v. EASTERN INDIA MOTION
PICTURE ASSOCIATION AND OTHERS (AIR 1977 SC 1443). That was a case where the
issue as to whether the existing and future right of music composer and
lyricist is capable of assignment and also whether the Producer of a
Cinematographic film, who was authorised by music composer and lyricist to
appropriate their work, can lawfully defeat their aforesaid right. The Supreme
court has held that an existing and future right of music composer and
lyricist in their respective works as defined in the Act is capable of
assignment. It has been further held that if an author (Composer) of a lyric
or musical work authorises a cinematographic film Producer to make a
cinematographic film of his composition, by recording it on the sound track of
a cinematographic film, he cannot complain of the infringement of the
copyright if the author (owner) of the Cinematographic film causes the lyric
or musical work recorded on the sound track of the film to be heard in public.
The composer of a lyric or a musical work however retains the right of
performing it in public for profit otherwise than as a part of the
cinematographic film and he cannot be restrained from doing so.

19\. That was a case between a composer of musical work and the owner of
cinematographic film. Here is a case where the dispute has arisen between a
registered Society which has got assignment of literary and musical work from
its owner and a broadcaster, who claims to have acquired licence from another
registered Society for broadcasting not only sound recording but also literary
and musical work. Further, the core issue that has arisen in that case is
found to be totally different from the issue arisen in the case on hand.
Therefore, the aforesaid authority does not apply to the facts and
circumstances of this case.

20\. The applicant Society has established, prima facie, that it has got
assignment of the literary and musical work from its owners by entering into
separate agreement of assignment. It is also shown before the court that sound
recording is a different class of work from that of literary and musical work.
The Government of India has also registered two separate Societies one for
carrying on the business of issuing or granting licence in respect of literary
and musical work viz., IPRS and another one in respect of sound recording work
viz., PPL. Unless the third respondent obtains licence for broadcasting
literary and musical work of the members of the applicant Society, they have
no right to broadcast the songs of the members of the applicant Society, it
has been established prima facie before this court.

21\. Under such circumstances, if the third respondent continues to broadcast
the songs of the members of the applicant Society without getting licence from
it, the interest of the applicant and its members would be in jeopardy. It has
also been shown before the court that many radio channels have obtained
licence both from the applicant Society and PPL. The balance of convenience is
found only in favour of the applicant.

22\. Therefore, ad interim injunction already granted by this court is made
absolute and O.A.No.1318 of 2008 stands allowed and Application No.37 of 2009
stands dismissed. There is no order as to costs.

ssk

