

Bombay High Court

Faber-Castell ... vs Cello Pens Pvt.Ltd. And Anr on 3 September, 2015

Bench: G.S. Patel

    
    
                                             201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC
    
    
    
         Atul
    
    
    
    
                                                                                
                IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                   ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
    
    
    
    
                                                        
                     NOTICE OF MOTION (L) NO. 1824 OF 2015
                                             IN
    
    
    
    
                                                       
                                   SUIT (L) NO. 696 OF 2015
    
    
           1.

Faber-Castell Aktiengesellschaft, a Company organized under the laws of
Germany having its office at Nurnberger

2\. Strasse 2 90546 Stein, Germany A.W. Faber-Castell (I) Pvt. Ltd.

a Company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 having its office at 801,
Kamala Executive Park, Off M.V.

Road, J.B. Nagar, Andheri (East), Mumbai

\- 400 059 ...Plaintiffs Versus

1\. Cello Pens Pvt. Ltd., a Company registered under the Companies Act, 1956
having its office at Cello House, corporate Avenue, 1st Floor, B Wing,
Sonawala Road, Goregaon (East), Mumbai 400 063 AND ALSO AT Plot No. 318/1-A,
Near Government Hospital, Kachigam Village Daman and Diu, 396 210

2\. eBay India Private Limited, 14th Floor, North Block, R-TECH Park, 1 of 27
::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::
201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC Western Express Highway, Goregaon (East),
Mumbai - 400 063, Maharashtra (India) ...Defendants Mr. Venkatesh Dhond,
Senior Advocate, with Mr. Rashmin Khandekar, Mr. Hemant Thadhani, Mr. Rahul
Dhote & Mr. Minesh Andharia, i/b Krishna & Saurastri Associates, for the
Plaintiffs.

Mr. Himanshu Kane, with Mr. N. Pendsey, Mr. Bhavin Shah & Ms. Bhavya Mohan,
i/b AZB & Partners, for the Defendant.

    
    
                                  ig   CORAM:     G.S. PATEL, J
                                       DATED:     2nd September 2015 &
                                                  3rd September 2015
         JUDGMENT:-
                                
    

1\. The Plaintiffs and the Defendant1 are fighting over crayons.

2\. According to the Plaintiffs, Faber-Castell AKG and A. W.

Faber-Castell (I) Pvt Ltd (together, "Faber-Castell"; separately "Faber-
Castell AKG" and "Faber-Castell India", respectively),2 they have since 2010
marketed in India through the 2nd Plaintiff a set of 24 crayons in quite
luscious colours, of a distinctive type and in unique packaging. Faber-Castell
says that the Defendant, Cello Pens Pvt Ltd ("Cello"), has not merely copied
every single aspect of the Faber-Castell product "down to the last
millimetre", as Mr. Dhond who appears for them puts it, but have infringed
Faber- Castell's design. The cause of action in the suit is in design and  1
The 2nd Defendant, ebay India Pvt Ltd, was directed to be deleted by a
separate order.

2

The 2nd Plaintiff is the wholly-owned Indian subsidiary of the 1st Plaintiff.

2 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53
::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC copyright infringement combined with a
cause of action in passing off.

3\. The Notice of Motion was first moved quite recently, on 9th July 2015.
Since then a very large number of Affidavits have come to be filed. The paper-
book in the Notice of Motion alone is now over 647 pages and has gone to the
stage of a Sur-Sur-Sur- Rejoinder. Despite this volume and bulk, the issue is
narrow, especially because Mr. Dhond limits his application at the final
hearing of this Notice of Motion to his cause of action in passing off. The
rest, as he quite correctly says, can await the trial.

4\. Mr. Dhond places his case thus: First, the Plaintiffs' product has a
unique and novel shape. By this he means the triangular or three-sided shape
of the 24 crayons in the package, as also the presence on all three faces of
the crayon's shank of two parallel lines of tiny protuberances or raised dots.
Whether these are purely functional to provide a better grip as Mr. Kane for
Cello claims, or whether these dots are what is described in this branch of
the law as 'capricious' is a matter to which I will turn shortly. The second
aspect to Mr. Dhond's argument is the manner in which the crayons are
presented in a tray, i.e., in two subsidiary recessed trays facing each other
and set in a larger outer container. Given that the crayons all also have
sharpened points -- and the fact that they are sharpenable and erasable is
also said to be distinctive -- when placed like thus, these crayons look
nothing so much as vibrantly coloured missiles in antipodal silos: one battery
of these crayon- missles faces the other across the demilitarized zone of
shallower recesses (ditches, in our martial analogy) that hold, predictably, a
3 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53
::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC benign eraser and a useful sharpener.
The larger container tray, in stealthy black plastic, slides out of a
colourful carton, one that is predominantly red. The carton itself has two
fenestellae through which the inner contents are partially visible. There are,
in addition, certain elements to the packaging itself, i.e., its predominantly
red colour scheme, the scattering of logos and icons on the package, and so
on. My military parallels notwithstanding, this is a bright and cheerful
package such as would certainly entice and excite a young child: the packaging
is vivid and eye-catching, and the crayons are -- there is no other word for
this -- gorgeous. They have a sheen to them that other rival products lack. At
a single glance, they evoke even in the adult mind memories of a simpler,
kinder, less complicated time.

5\. The outer packaging is, however, by now of little consequence since Mr.
Kane states that Cello's outer packaging has been withdrawn from the market
and an entirely new and dissimilar packaging has been, or is about to be,
introduced. The annexure to this order, provided by Mr. Dhond, has
representations of the competing products in a tabulated comparison.

6\. Faber-Castell AKG is a very old company. It was established in 1761. It is
widely renowned for its range of quality writing products and instruments:
pencils, both normal and mechanical or automatic, coloured pencils, crayons,
pens, inks and so on. Its sets of colour pencils and crayons have been
available overseas for many decades. Faber-Castell India launched this set of
crayon products in India in July 2010. Mr. Dhond points out that in the four
or five years since the launch in India, Faber-Castell has had a total sale of
4 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53
::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC nearly Rs. 5 crores of these crayons.
There is a tabulation set out in the plaint itself3 and a statement certified
by the Chartered Accountants is also on file.4 In addition, the Plaintiffs
claim to have spent nearly Rs. 50 lakhs on publicity and promotion.

7\. Faber-Castell says that Cello's rival products, though apparently
manufactured in January 2014, entered the domestic Indian market for the first
time only in September 2014. At that time, Cello's products was sold in the
packaging that has now been discontinued (in May 2015). The product line
itself, however, continues to be offered although in a different container.
Cello is itself no neophyte or upstart in the field. It has been in existence
since 1995. It makes a wide range of stationery and writing instruments. It
has high volumes in sales. In July 2014, Société Bic ("Bic"), the well-known
French writing instruments and stationery manufacturer, acquired a 75% stake
in Cello's writing instruments business. Bic itself makes a range of products
from stationery to lighters, shavers and more.

8\. Mr. Dhond is careful to point out that Faber-Castell AKG has itself for a
considerable period in the past made and sold pencils and automatic or
rotating pencils with the same features of parallel lines of surface dots, or
in a triangular form, or both. He claims, however, that since 2010, Faber-
Castell India is the only domestic manufacturer and vendor of this type of
crayon products in India. The product as sold in this form, with these
features, and in this packaging has in that time come to be associated
uniquely with  3 Plaint, para 18, pp. 10-11  4 Motion, p. 341.

5 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53
::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC Faber-Castell. The promotional
material indicates, he says, that there are four key elements to the products:
their triangular shape, that they are erasable; that they are sharpenable; and
that they have a non-slip grip. The arrangement of these crayons in a
particular fashion in a tray is also, he says, unique and novel. Mr. Dhond is
careful to point out that he does not claim any monopoly on the triangular
shape itself, nor in the existence of some form of surface roughening to
provide a better grip, or even in the erasability or sharpenability of the
crayons. What Faber-Castell does claim is that the combination of all these
facets in this particular manner and presentation goes beyond the merely
functional. It is entirely aesthetic and novel, and certainly unique to Faber-
Castell and no one else. One look at the product identifies it instantly as a
Faber-

Castell offering. When, therefore, Mr. Dhond speaks of a "novelty in shape and
configuration", I understand him to mean by this both an aesthetic or an
artistic shape and design or, more usefully for our purpose, something that is
entirely 'capricious'. It was, for example, entirely possible for Cello to
array its crayons in a single file. Others have done just that. Yet others
have placed them in quadrants. It was possible for Cello to make crayons of an
entirely different length or thickness, and to provide another, equally
functional yet aesthetically distinct, non-slip surface. Mr. Dhond urges that
merely because a certain feature also serves a functional purpose, this does
not by itself eclipse its aesthetic or novel qualities. It is one thing if the
feature is only functional and has no discernible aesthetic, unique aspect. At
the other end of this legal spectrum lies a feature that is wholly non-
functional, that is to say, purely aesthetic. Somewhere in between lies a
design that is at once functional in its purpose and entirely aesthetic and
novel in its 6 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC realization of
that functionality. Pure function is at one end of this scale. Pure form, with
no element of functionality, at the other. The battleground is in the space
between. The same functionality, he says, may be realized in a variety of
forms, and it is a particular form that is adopted that can be said to be
unique, not its underlying functionality. He points out that other
manufacturers also make non-slip crayons, or ones that claim to provide a good
'grip', but they use an entirely different aesthetic method of achieving this.
Some provide ridges. Others use a raised spiral, like ivy climbing a trellis
stem. In some, the shank itself is cylindrical.

9\. Cello's product, he says, bears an unholy resemblance to the Faber-Castell
product. This is no mere copy. This is a wholesale passing off of Cello's
product as that of Faber-Castell's. The rival product is complete piracy, the
most slavish imitation imaginable. There is absolutely no method to
distinguish between the two except this: that the words Faber-Castell and the
miniscule logo embossed on one face of the triangular shank of each crayon of
Faber-Castell's set are missing in Cello's. Rotate the crayon's shank to the
next face and neither product can be told one from the other.

Given the target audience, viz., children, the chances of confusion are not
just exceedingly high: they are certain. This is not a case of a 'similarity'
or 'deceptive similarity'. The two products, Mr. Dhond says, are
indistinguishable. It is Mr. Dhond's case, as indeed it must be in a case of
passing off, that not only have Faber-Castell's products acquired a
significant reputation and standing in the market but they have also acquired
a secondary significance in that they are at once visually identifiable as
those of Faber-Castell and of 7 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 :::
Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC
Faber-Castell alone. The Plaintiffs themselves have won several awards for
their products; some details are set out in the plaint.

10\. According to Mr. Dhond, Cello's case on affidavit seems to be this: that
it is nothing more than a serendipity that its products come to have exactly
the same shape, features and configurations as Faber-Castell's. Cello claims
that each of these features -- the triangular shape, the raised dots, the
sharpenable aspect, the erasability, the alignment in the trays, the dress and
so on -- are all matters in the public domain. Cello has only put all of this
public domain matter together. It is only coincidental that the end result of
Cello's efforts just happens to mirror Faber-Castell's. A more dishonest
defence, Mr. Dhond says, and I think quite correctly, is difficult to
conceive. This seems to me an egregious case of passing off. It is true that
there are products in the market that have crayons but none are the kind of
exact replica of Faber-Castell's products that Cello makes.

11\. Mr. Kane for Cello charges Faber-Castell with suppression: the plaint
carefully omits mention of the crucial fact of prior publication of Faber-
Castell AKG's designs of this very nature in respect of writing instruments
and of these crayons themselves. This suppression is material, he submits,
because each of the elements to which Mr. Dhond refers is purely functional
and not a 'capricious' addition. If there is in fact prior publication, in Mr.
Kane's submission, then the case of infringement of design cannot be
sustained, especially at an interim stage; and it is then not permissible for
Faber-Castell to allege only passing off in the manner that they now seek to
do. They must show that they have 8 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 :::
Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC
acquired a reputation and goodwill and such exclusivity in the features to
which Mr. Dhond alludes that the product refers to, and only to Faber-Castell.
It must show that the matters sought to be protected are neither purely
descriptive nor purely functional. In addition, Faber-Castell has the task of
showing that despite the existence of several distinguishing marks, confusion
is inevitable or has in fact actually occured.

12\. A word first, about this term 'capricious', one that I have used three
times already. It is, as I understand, a term of art in the field. It is today
carried forward from the judgments of several decades ago, and I believe it
was first used in a stricter and more formal, even antiquarian, sense than we
are wont to do today. It meant then 'fanciful' or 'witty', a usage now
obsolete. 5 Today, it connotes a conduct or act that follows no predictable
pattern, determined or marked by whim rather than reason. 6 Its many synonyms
show our understanding to be of significant negative implications:
arbitrariness, whimsy, unevenness in dealing, unpredictability, impulsiveness,
fickleness, erraticism; being volatile, unstable, temperamental.7 In the
context of design law, it means none of these things. It does not mean
frivolous, flippant or facetious. It means, at least in my comprehension of
it, simply something that is not purely functional; a triumph of form over
function, perhaps. It speaks to the existence of an aesthetic or artistic
appeal in a design as opposed to one that serves only a functional purpose.

5

dictionary.com: http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/capricious  6 Oxford
Illustrated Dictionary, 1975 ed.:"Guided by whim; inconstant, irregular,
incalculable".

7

The New Thesaurus, Roget's II; Houghton Mifflin, 1980 9 of 27  ::: Uploaded on
- 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::
201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC

13\. It is in this context and with this interpretation that I propose now to
examine one of the rival elements a little more closely. This is the series of
dots that embellish the three flanks of each crayon's shank. Mr. Kane would
have it that these raised dots are only functional, and the matter ends at
that. I do not think this is correct. This over-simplifies what Faber-
Castell's crayons have on them.

There are two parallel lines of dots upto about two-thirds of the length of
each of the three flat planes of each crayon's shank. The remaining one-third
length on two of the three planes is bare. On the third flank, after the
parallel lines of dots, is a miniscule Faber- Castell logo and then the words
"Faber-Castell". This logo and name are missing in Cello's crayons. But it is
not the logo or the name that matters; they are not the only artistic elements
here. So too are the twin parallel lines of dots. There is nothing to suggest
that the functionality of a better grip is afforded by or only by this twin
series of parallel lines of dots and of such parallel lines extending only to
this specific extent or length. Indeed, the suggestion, as far as I can tell,
is that any sort of disruption in the smoothness of the crayon's shank should
assist, to greater or lesser degree, in providing a better grip: a groove,
perhaps, or a spiral ridge, a rifling and so on. There may be other
functionalities that serve this purpose too: a movable flange, perhaps, or a
single line of large raised dots, crenellations, embrasures, or philtrum-like
scoops.

14\. This question -- whether an exact replica made by a defendant can be
permitted to continue in such a case -- has frequently occupied courts both
here and abroad. It is an accepted position in law that mere copying is not
passing off. That however is 10 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 :::
Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC
not the case that Mr. Dhond makes when he cites the decision of the Chancery
Division in Jones v. Hallworth.8 The issue before that court related to
bundles of polishing cloths and the Court posed the question in precisely the
manner that it arises here: would an ordinary, unsuspecting and unwary
purchaser intending to buy a box of crayons that he knows is manufactured and
sold by Faber-

Castell, be induced to buy, or even by inadvertence buy, the rival product by
Cello in the belief that it was manufactured and sold by Faber-Castell? If the
answer to that question is yes, then Mr. Dhond is undoubtedly entitled to an
injunction. In matters such as this, as the court in Jones v. Hallworth held,
ultimately it is the perception of the court that turns the tide. Like beauty,
it lies in the eye of the beholder. Unlike beauty, a matter entirely
subjective, a judicial perception is supposedly more objective. That, as far
as I can tell, is about the only difference.

15\. I have seen the two rival products. I have also incidentally seen a
number of other crayon boxes, but I will come to that a little later, as that
is yet another limb to Mr. Dhond's argument. Between the two rival products,
there is, in my perception of it, no distinction at all. Indeed, I should find
myself in the greatest of difficulty if asked to tell one from the other and
would have to examine each very closely indeed to be able to draw any
distinction. There is a passage in John v. Hallworth that merits reproduction
not only for the mellifluous language in which the legal proposition is
expressed but because it seems to me to place with unerring accuracy the very
proposition that Mr. Dhond canvasses today.

8

14 RPC 225 11 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC "... I only refer
to it as showing what the difficulty is; because there, the Court of Appeal,
consisting of three learned Judges, all thought -- their three pairs of eyes
all thought -- that the similarities were supreme, as the differences were of
little moment. The difficulty of the task imposed upon the Judge consists in
what I have stated. One has to go through a certain process of induction;
because in no case that ever I tried and in no case that I ever heard of was
it not possible for the Defendant to say, "I am perfectly at liberty to make
this article; I am at perfect liberty to call it so-and-so; I am perfectly at
liberty to attach to it such-and-such a name," and so on to the end of the
chapter. If you take

\-- as, of course, Mr. Bigham, as an advocate, did take

\-- the points of similarity in detail, it is often not very difficult --
sometimes it is extremely easy -- to show that in all those points of
similarity the Defendant is perfectly right and has played the part of an
innocent man. That applies directly to this case. No one contends that the
Defendants are not entitled to manufacture and sell polishing cloths; nobody
contends that they are not entitled to manufacture and sell polishing cloths
of certain sizes, or to impress thereon by printing or otherwise certain
words; nobody contends that they are not at liberty to make these of Egyptian
or American cotton, and, if they make them of Egyptian cotton alone, or of
Egyptian and American cotton mixed, not to produce them of a certain colour.
Nobody contends that this fact pile velveteen is not open and common to the
trade and suitable to the particular article; that it may not be singed; that
it may not be scoured. All those things are perfectly common to the trade;
every one of them may be done with perfect innocence. But, by an inductive
process, one may come to this conclusion, that every one of those perfectly
innocent things when combined in a series 12 of 27  ::: Uploaded on -
08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-
CASTELL-F.DOC may produce something which is the reverse of innocent."

(Emphasis supplied)

16\. This is true of the present case as well. There is no reason, for
instance, if, as Mr. Kane insists, the twin lines of raised dots are purely
functional, they should not extend the entire length of the shank but should
instead stop precisely at the point where Faber- Castell has chosen to stop
them, leaving space for their logo and name. Indeed, I imagine I should have
to subject the crayons to the most detailed examination and even then I might
not be able to tell:

I would not know, for instance, if in looking at the Cello product, Faber-
Castell, in its corporate or marketing wisdom, had decided to put out crayons
that did not bear its logo or name imprinted on the shanks. I would have to
imagine for myself that that which is not is an indicator of a
differentiation. Of what might the then 'missing' Faber-Castell logo and name
be indicative: proof of absence or absence of proof? This is no idle
speculation: if we rotate any of the Faber-Castell crayons exactly one-third
of a turn and set it side by side with the Cello crayon of the same colour,
this is very much the dilemma that confronts us. In neither product do we then
see the Faber-Castell logo nor the name. How would we tell one from the other?
If the answer to that is that the 'dots' in the Cello product are somewhat
squarer than those in the Faber-Castell crayons, then that is surely too
insignificant a distinction to be of any consequence.

17\. Our own Courts are no strangers to these cases. Mr. Dhond, not
unexpectedly, cites the decision of a learned Single Judge in 13 of 27  :::
Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::
201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC Whirlpool of India Ltd. v Videocon
Industries Ltd. 9 That was a battle of washing machines. There, as in the
present case, the argument was that the features sought to be protected were
purely functional and lacked all redeeming aesthetic or non-functional
aspects. Mr. Justice Kathawalla dealt with this argument:

> "In such cases, the conundrum of functionality is resolved by taking note of
> the fact that it would make no impact on the article's functionality, if the
> function could be performed by the use of another shape as well. The fact
> that there are umpteen number of shapes in which washing machines are sold
> clearly shows that the external shape has nothing to do with the function
> sought to be performed. In the present case, it surely cannot be argued that
> the constraints of functionality were such that the Plaintiff's design was
> the only design which could have been devised. Since the external shape of
> the Plaintiff's washing machine has nothing to do with the function it
> performs and since the Plaintiff in the present case is seeking enforcement
> of its entire design and not an individual component thereof, the case law
> cited by the Defendant in support of its defense attributing features of the
> Plaintiff's design to functional requirements, has no bearing on the present
> case."

> (Emphasis supplied)

> 18\. This finding in Whirlpool is, in my view, exactly applicable to Mr.
> Dhond's case. As I have noted it is not sufficient for a defendant to say
> that all that it has done is to take one aspect of its product from one
> source, another from another source and so on "to the end of the chapter"
> till they have, by the most curious but  9 (2013) 1 Mh.L.J. 197 14 of 27
> ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::
> 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC unexplained coincidence, arrived at a
> product that is so completely indistinguishable from that of the plaintiff
> seeking protection. What Mr. Dhond seeks to protect is not only this or that
> feature. It is the aggregate or concatenation of the very many features, big
> and small, brought together in a unity identifiable as that of Faber-
> Castell.

19\. Mr. Kane submits that unless the features themselves are shown to be
artistic embellishments bereft of any functional element, no protection can be
granted. The mere copying of a shape or the mere replication of Faber-
Castell's tray, crayon, triangular shape, sharpened point or erasable quality
is not in itself sufficient.

Others have sharpenable crayons in the market, he says and points to certain
illustrations annexed to the Affidavit filed by the Defendant. Yet others have
crayons that are erasable. And there are even those that have both, and some
that arrange them in a tray with individual holding racks. I believe this
argument to be disingenuous and, to the extent that it is based on Benchairs
Limited v Chair Centre Ltd.,10 more than somewhat misplaced. Apart from
anything else, the portions in the report emphasized by Mr. Kane are from the
decision of Graham J, sitting singly. The appellate decision, by Russell LJ
for the Court, allowed the appeal with costs.

20\. As I have noted the Whirlpool decision itself considers a situation where
a particular feature or element has both form and function. The existence of
function if combined with form does not disentitle it from all protection
altogether. Indeed in the decision cited by Mr. Kane it was held that when a
defendant does something further to suggest that the articles that he sells
are those  10 1974 RPC 429 15 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 :::
Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC of
the plaintiff and even if he does so by indirect representation such as by
imitating a get up by enclosing the articles in a distinctive package similar
to that of the plaintiff, the plaintiff would be entitled to an injunction.
The word 'get up' itself is explained as something that is, to use the word
again, capricious and as I have already explained this does not mean arbitrary
or frivolous. It means something that is fanciful or an embellishment.

21\. Another learned Single Judge of this Court (Dr. D.Y.

Chandrachud J as he then was) also considered this issue in Gorbatschow Wodka
KG v John Distilleries Ltd. 11 He reiterated the well settled principles that
a Court must have due regard to the overall impact of the rival marks or goods
and that the law recognized the importance of the shape in which a trader
chooses to sell his goods. A considerable amount of authority was discussed,
including, I must note, a decision of another learned Single Judge of this
Court12 in Kemp & Company & Ors. v Prima Pastics Ltd.13 I only note this
because Kemp and Company is a decision on which Mr. Kane relies. In
Gorbatschow Wodka KG, Chandrachud J held that the test is whether the shape
adopted by the plaintiff is 'capricious', meant purely to give the article a
distinctive appearance and characteristic of that particular manufacturer's
goods. Secondly, he held that a conscious imitation by a defendant of the
various constituent elements that go into the uniqueness of the plaintiff's
product must lead to a conclusion that confusion and deception are both,
respectively, inevitable and intended.

11

(2011) 4 Mh.L.J. 842  12 R.M. Lodha J., as he then was  13 (1999) PTC 96 16 of
27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::
201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC

22\. I also do not see how the decision in Kemp and Company & Ors. v Prima
Plastics Ltd.14 can be said to be of any possible assistance to Mr. Kane.
Citing Copinger and Stone James on Copyright, the Court held that a mere copy
is not per se a false representation. The plaintiff must show more than a mere
copy or a mere similarity. Where an article is fashioned in an unusual way to
lend it a distinctive appearance characteristic of one party's product range
and that party can establish a reputation acquired over some appreciable time,
then putting a virtually indistinguishable copy or replica of it in the market
complete with these uniquely identifying and distinguishing features would
amount to a misrepresentation that the rival product too emanated from the
claimant.

23\. There is then the decision of another learned Single Judge of this
Court15 in a case that concerned Faber-Castell AKG itself:

Faber Castell Aktiengesellschaft v. Pikpen (P.) Ltd.16 It was in relation to
Faber-Castell's highlighter or text liner markers. Bobde J set out the unique
features of the plaintiffs' product. After considering the various provisions
of law, he granted the injunction. While doing so, he considered certain
defences that have echoes in the defences taken by Mr. Kane before me. One of
these defences taken before Bobde J was that the design was previously
published. In that case, of course, the submission was that the design
registration was liable to be cancelled. This is precisely Mr. Kane's
formulation here and a statement is made that Cello has indeed filed an
application for cancellation as well. That is a separate matter that will take
its own  14 (2000) PTC 96  15 S.A. Bobde J., as he then was  16 2003 (27) PTC
538 (Bom) 17 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC course but that is
not in itself a reason to deny relief on the ground of passing off if a
sufficient cause has been made out. Bobde J also addressed the question of
whether the plaintiffs' goods taken as a whole could be said to have nothing
so distinctive about them as to uniquely identify them as goods of the
plaintiffs. The two products

\-- the Faber-Castell highlighter and the Pikpen highlighter -- were compared
as a whole. The court returned a finding that Pikpen was attempting to pass
off its goods as Faber-Castell's. Having regard to the unique features of
Faber-Castell's products in the present case, I find I am unable to arrive at
an answer different from that of Bobde J.

24\. There are several other cases in this same vein. I do not think it is
necessary to multiply authorities.

25\. The previous discussion already establishes that Cello's use of the twin
parallel dotted lines to two-thirds of the length of each flank of the
triangular crayon's shank is entirely an artistic element unique to the
Plaintiffs. There is no reason at all, and nor is there any material before me
to suggest that the only way to provide a sure grip is to have just this set
of dots in two parallel lines to just this extent.

26\. I also believe Mr. Kane slightly misunderstood Mr. Dhond's submission on
a transborder reputation. All that Mr. Dhond sought to suggest was that while
the crayons in question entered the market in India in 2010 they had long been
so produced, had enjoyed a reputation for excellence, and were also known for
their 18 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015
23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC unique characteristic in
overseas markets.17 I do however find Mr. Kane's citation of a passage from
Halsbury's Laws of England, 5th Edition (2014) to be of immense relevance,
though perhaps not in the way Mr. Kane intends. Paragraph 306 of that text
makes it clear that mere copying is not actionable in the absence of
misrepresentation in English Law. So long as the goods are sufficiently
distinguished by other means, the reproduction of one person's product will
not enjoy protection and no order or injunction in passing off will result.
The task, therefore, is to assess what is it in the defendants' product that
might lead a purchaser -- and in this case I am acutely aware that our quidam
purchaser might be an reluctant or unwilling parent attempting to pacify a
particularly petulant child -- from being able to tell the Cello's products
from Faber-Castell's. Left to myself, I could not tell the difference. I very
much doubt that the harried parent would. To say then that there is this or
that distinguishing feature which is minor and indiscernible -- there is in
fact such a minor difference even in the price, no more than Rs. 10/-, just to
add to the already existing confusion -- or that there are certain features
that are common to the trade and it is only these that have been used, is I
think no answer at all when one finds that every single feature that is being
used in a unique fashion by Faber-Castell in creating their products has been
replicated, as Mr. Dhond put it, down to the last millimetre, in Cello's
product. This is an exact fit with the Jones v Hallworth, Whirlpool and Pikpen
tests. Indeed, other than the embossing of the Faber-Castell name and logo on
one face of the triangular crayon, I do not see how at a visual glance anyone
would be able to tell one product from the other. To adopt one feature may  17
M/s. Smithkline Beecham Plc. & Ors. v M/s. Hindustan Lever Limited & Ors.,
(2000) PTC 83 19 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC be happenstance;
two might be coincidence; to replicate them all, Mr. Dhond insists, and I
think with some considerable justification, is, if not actually enemy action,
certainly deserving of an injunction.

27\. There is in Jones v Hallworth a passage that is remarkably close to this
case:18 Now, it is a strange accident, to begin with, that, the Plaintiffs
having produced these polishing cloths in five sizes, the Defendant has
produced his polishing cloths in the same five sizes. I know that he has since
produced a sixth, and Mr. Hallworth has told me that the sixth has been the
most successful. That appears to be only of late date, and, bearing in mind
what he says, that he has not had a large sale at all of any, I do not think
that that comes to a matter of very great weight. But for a long time, at any
rate, until arrangements were made for producing a different size, the
Defendant produced precisely the same five sizes as the Plaintiff produced.
Now, is that an accident, or is it intentional?

(Emphasis supplied)

28\. The last question that remains is whether the Plaintiffs would be
entitled to an injunction and whether, in other words, monetary compensation
might suffice, and where lies the balance of convenience. I believe this
question answers itself. The longer these rival products remain in the market,
the greater the continuing and ongoing, and perhaps incalculable loss to
Faber-Castell and to the market they have built up. In my view, the injunction
must follow. The preservation of the status quo demands it.

18

Supra, at p. 237 20 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC

29\. In view of the fact that Mr. Dhond does not press prayer clauses (a) and
(b), because the Defendants have changed the outer packaging colour
combination and art work, there will be an injunction in terms of prayer
clauses (c) and (d), which read thus:

> "(c) that pending the hearing and final disposal of the suit, the Defendants
> by themselves and/or through their servants, agents, dealers, manufacturers,
> directors, partners, owners, proprietors and/or otherwise howsoever be
> restrained by an order and injunction of this Hon'ble Court from this
> Hon'ble Court restraining the Defendant by itself, and/or through its
> servants and agents from using and/or causing to be used and/or
> manufacturing and/or selling in any manner the impugned product with the
> impugned trade dress and/or packaging and/or get up being Exhibit H hereto
> which is deceptively and/or confusingly similar to the trade dress and/or
> packaging of the Plaintiffs' product being Exhibit D hereto so as to pass
> off and/or enable other to pass off their impugned product as and for that
> of the Plaintiffs;

> (d) that pending the hearing and final disposal of the suit, the Defendants
> by themselves and/or through their servants, agents, dealers, manufacturers,
> directors, partners, owners, proprietors and/or otherwise howsoever be
> restrained by an order and injunction of this Hon'ble Court from using
> and/or applying in any manner the impugned design relating to crayon and/or
> features of shape and configuration being Exhibit J hereto and/or any other
> design relating to crayon and/or features of shape and configuration which
> is/are fraudulently and/or colourbly and/or obviously similar in any manner
> whatsoever to those of the Plaintiffs as shown in Exhibits F and G hereto so
> as to pass off 21 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
> 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC and/or enable
> other to pass off the impugned design relating crayon as and for that of the
> Plaintiffs;"

30\. Counsel for Cello seeks a stay of the operation of this order for four
weeks. This is opposed by Mr. Dhond and, in my view, rightly. To grant stay
would be to permit Cello to continue in the tort. Cello's products do not
appear to be in the market today. The application for stay is made on the
basis that Cello seeks to "liquidate its existing inventory". That is telling.
If ever there was a case to reject an application for stay, this is it: I do
not see why a stay of this order should serve as an opportunity to Cello to
now flood the market with its rival products in the guise of 'liquidating
inventory'. The application for stay is rejected.

(G. S. PATEL, J.) CERTIFICATE "Certified to be true and correct copy of the
original signed Judgment/order."

22 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53
::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC Faber-Castell Products Cello Products
23 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53
::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC 24 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015
::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-
CASTELL-F.DOC 25 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on -
08/09/2015 23:55:53 ::: 201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC Plaintiff's
Registered design Defendant No.1's Crayon No. 228795 26 of 27  ::: Uploaded on
- 08/09/2015 ::: Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::
201-NMSL1824-15-FABER-CASTELL-F.DOC 27 of 27  ::: Uploaded on - 08/09/2015 :::
Downloaded on - 08/09/2015 23:55:53 :::

