

Delhi High Court

Penguin Books Ltd. vs India Book Distributors And Ors. on 1 August, 1984

Equivalent citations: AIR 1985 Delhi 29, 26 (1984) DLT 316

Author: A B Rohatgi

Bench: A Rohatgi, G Jain

JUDGMENT Avadh Behari Rohatgi, J.

(1) The appellants, Penguin Books Ltd of England original plaintiffs brought a
suit for perpetual injunction against the respondents, M/s. India Book
Distributors of New Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Calcutta (original defendants)
restraining them from infringing Penguins' territorial c[license in 23 books,
the subject matter of the suit. Admittedly India Book Distributors, Bombay are
importing, distributing and offering for sale in India 13 out of these 23
titles. Some of these books arc well known works such as Animal Farm by George
Orwell, Far Pavilion, Shadow of the Moon. both by M. M. Kaye. Some are recent
publications such as Celebrity by Thomas Thompson, Lacs by Shiriey Conran.

(2) Penguins asked for a temporary injunction in the suit. The application was
heard by a learned single judge on the original side of this court where the
suit was instituted. He refused the injunction. From his order of refusal
Penguins appeal to this court.

(3) The learned judge formed the view that by reason of the consent decree
which was passed by the district court in the United States of America
Penguins were disentitled to claim the equitable relief of injunction. What
had happened was this. The U.S. Government brought a suit against various
publishers, British and American including Penguin:, Inc., on the complaint
that their agreements were in breach of the Anti-Trust: suit ended in a
consent judgment.

(4) Clauses V and Vi of the consent decree provide as follows "V. Each
defendant is enjoined and restrained, directly or indirectly, from preventing
or restricting any purchaser of a lawfully published book from importing or
exporting such book to or from the limited States or such purchaser from
selling, distributing or providing for the resale of such Book to customers in
United Slates interstate or foreign commerce."

VI. "Nothing in this Final Judgment shall prevent any defendant, in and of
itself, from acquiring, granting or otherwise transferring exclusive or non-
exclusive copyright rights, or from exercising or authorising the exercise of
such rights under the copyright law of any country, including the United
Slates, or from the assertion of such other statutory rights as such defendant
may have, provided that no foreign copyright law or other foreign statutory
right may be used by any defendant to exclude or restrict the importation or
resale in the United States of a lawfully published Book (5) The learned judge
on a construction of these clauses came to the conclusion that Penguins cannot
prevent any purchaser of lawfully published books in America from importing
them into India. He said : "On a plain reading of the clauses, it is clear
that liberty is given to any purchaser in any part of the world to purchase
lawfully published books in America and to export them wherever he likes."

(6) At one stage Penguins' attorney denied the knowledge of the consent
decree. Later on he admitted that that was so. The learned judge was of the
opinion that Penguins had not come with clean hands. In any case, he held,
they had "cut off their hands" by being a consenting party to the decree. He
said : "Before anybody approaches the court of equity for discretionary
relief, he has to come with clean hands. What to talk of clean hands, the
plaintiffs have already cut off their hands."

(7) Several contentions were raised in the appeal. Firstly Penguins argued
that the consent decree was not a bar to the assertion of their statutory
rights under the Copyright Act, 1957 of India. From the various agreements
filed by Penguins it appears that they are the licensees or assignees of
territorial rights in the copyright of the subject books as regards India.
They being the exclusive licensees it is claimed that Penguins are entitled to
restrain India Book Distributors (India Distributors) from importing the
parallel American editions of these 23 titles in India. India Distributors
deny the title of Penguins. In my opinion there is a prima facie proof of
their being licensees of the books in question. Whit ford Committee observed
that "the practice of challenging title is very often no more than abuse of
process." (p. 186).

(8) On the consent decree my view is that clause V has no extra-territorial
effects. It prohibits the publishers from entering into agreements which are
hit by the Anti-Trust- Laws of the United States. "All jurisdiction is
properly territorial." (Gurdayal Singh v. Raja of Faridkot, (1895) 22 Cal.
222(1). It was said long ago by Story J. in the Supreme Court of the United
States in The Apollon (1924) 9 Wheat 362(2), 370 : "The laws of no nation can
justly extend beyond its own territories, except so far as regards its own
citizens." And in his book, Story's Conflict of Laws 2nd cd. (1841) p. 26, he
said : "No state or nation can, by its laws, directly affect or bind property
out of its own territory, or bind persons not resident therein." U.S. is a
foreign state. It is an independent sovereign government which exercises
sovereign authority over its own territory, and which, by international law,
has no right to exercise sovereign authority beyond its own territorial
limits.

(9) As with legislatures so with courts. No court can pass a decree so as to
affect the rights of persons outside their jurisdiction. This is clear from
clause Vi which is in the nature of a proviso. The courts in India cannot
recognise the extra territorial jurisdiction of a District Court of the United
States, notwithstanding the comity of nations. The writ of the United States
does not run in this . country. Clause Vi is a saving clause. Its object is to
save the rights which arc subject to the protection of foreign courts namely,
courts other than those in the United States. Clause V does not destroy or
qualify the statutory rights belonging to the publishers which they n-.ay have
in foreign countries under regional arrangements. (See British Nylon Spinners
Ltd. v. Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd.. 69 Rpc 288(3) affirmed in 71 Rpc
327).

(10) Copyright law is a territorial concept and each nation has its own laws.
In America in. America it may not be possible to place restrictions on the
resale of books. But sale within the United States obviously cannot abrogate
the effect of the laws of the particular place where they are imported. It
appears to me that an importer would be subject to the law of the particular
country to which he happens to take the books. The importer cannot disregard
the laws of other countries. I would decide against the freedom ("liberty" as
tile learned judge phrased it) from restriction claimed by India Distributors.
The learned judge upheld this freedom. In my respectful opinion he was wrong,
American books cannot be sold into India so as to defeat the rights of the
exclusive licensee.

(11) Mr. Mukhi, counsel for the defendants, submitted that the gist of the
consent decree is that there will be no ban on American editions in 70
countries of the British traditional market. The learned judge accepted this
contention. In my opinion this is not a sound view. Whatever may be the
position under American law, its "interstate or foreign commerce" (me tiling
is certain. Penguins have not renounced their foreign copyrights in the
subject books.

(12) Counsel for the plaintiffs contended that the importation of American
editions for the purpose of resale in India is an infringement of copyright of
Penguins. They have a territorially exclusive license for India. Therefore the
act of importation of American books by the defendants must be shown to have
been licensed. "Importation is forbidden unless a license has been given." If
this view is not taken, not only will the procedure of granting exclusive
licenses for particular areas of copyright be seriously undermined, but the
national division of copyright set up under the system of International
Copyright Convention in so far as it provides for partial assignments and
exclusive licenses, both vertical and horizontal, would to a significant
degree be subverted. (Time-Life International v. Interstate Parcel Express
Co., (1978) Fleet Street Reports 251, 265(4) per Bowen CJ).

(13) For the purposes of this application it was conceded by Mr. Michael Fysh,
counsel for Penguins, that Penguins Inc. and Penguins Ltd. may be taken to be
the same. He made E it clear that concession was solely for the purposes of
this motion and that does not prejudice any contention that Penguins may like
to put forward upon that matter when the suit comes to trial.

(14) On the construction of the consent decree I am of opinion that copyright
is a species of property and an effective right to use the copyright can be
asserted in India by Penguins notwithstanding the fact that they were
consenting parties to the U.S. judgment. I cannot accept the view of the
learned judge that they had "cut off their hands" and bartered away their
rights.

(15) The learned judge took the view that Penguins had not come with clean
hands. He who conies into equity must come with clean hands. This is true. But
if at one stage Penguins' attorney denied the existence of the consent decree
it does not follow that he could act rectify the error by admitting the fact
of the consent decree. The denial was born of ignorance. The denial was
retracted. The maxim of clean hands must not be taken too widely. "Equity does
not demand that its suitors shall have led blameless lives", as Brandeis J.
said. ( Loughran v Loughran 292 U.S. 216(5) , What bars the claim is not. a
general depravity but one which has "an immediate and necessary relation to
the equity sued for." (Snell's Equity 28th ed. p. 33).

(16) There was no bad faith. It was an innocent failure to disclose a material
fact. The maxim withholds assistance of. court where the wrongdoer is trying
to enjoy the fruits of his own wrong. It is not a maxim of which a defendant
can take advantage. It is a self-imposed ordinance that closes the door of a
court of equity to one tainted with inequitableness or bad faith relative to
the matter in which he seeks relief.

(17) Secondly, Messrs Sorabjee and Mukhi, counsel for India Distributors,
argued that importation of lawfully published books from America into India is
not an infringement under the Copyright Act, 1957 (the Act). Tins is a
fallacious argument. The expression "owner of copyright" includes an exclusive
licensee. (Section 54(a) ). Exclusive licensee is defined in section 2(g) as a
licensee having "any right comprised in the copyright" in a work to the
exclusion of all other persons including the owner of the copyright. licenses
may be limited in time, territory and scope. Assignment either wholly or
partially of the rights of the copyright owner is permissible under the Act
(Section 18).

(18) Now Penguins are exclusive licensees as they are the assignees of
copyrights from the anthers in some cases and publishers in others and have an
exclusive right to print, publish and market these twenty three titles in
India. Section 55(1) provides "civil remedies" for infringement of copyright,
namely, injunction, damages, accounts "as are or may be conferred by law for
the infringement of a right". So Penguins are extitled to sue "for the
infringement of a right".

(19) It is not the case of India Distributors that they were not aware of
Penguins' copyright or bad no knowledge that copyright subsisted in them under
a territorial arrangement with the authors or publishers of those books.
Penguins are the assignees of the copyright and "entitled to any right
comprised in the copyright so assigned." (Section 18(2) ).

(20) Copyright means the "exclusive right" in the case of a literary work to
do or authorise the doing of the following among others : (i)to reproduce the
work in any material form; (ii) to publish the work. (Section 14(1)(a)(i) and
(ii) ).

    
    
     (21) Section 51 deals with infringement of copyright. It is a basic provision. It says : "51. Copyright in a work shall be deemed to be    (A) Infring when any person, without a license granted by the owner of the Copyright or the Registrar at Copyrights under this Act or in contravention of the conditions of a license so granted or of any condition imposed by a competent authority under this Act   
    
     (i) does anything the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred upon the owner of the copyright, or (ii) permits for profit any place to be used for the performance of the work in public where such performance constitutes an infringement of the copyright in the work unless he was not aware and had not reasonable ground for believing that such performance would be an infringement of copyright, or    B)when any person   
    
     (i) makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade displays or offers for sale or hire, or ii) distributes either for the purpose of trade or to such an extent as to affent prejudicially the owner of the copyright, or (iii) by way of trade exhibits in public, or (iv) imports (except for the private and domestic use of the importer) into India any infringing copies of the work.    EXPLANATION. For the purposes of this section, the reproduction of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work in the form of a cinematograph film Shall be deemed to be an "infringing copy".   
    
    

(22) Importation of books which are "infringing copies of the work" is an
infringement. So is the sale thereof. If any person, without the license of
the copyright owner, imports into India for the purpose of selling or
distributing for purposes of trade the literary work the copyright is
infringed. Any importalion of infringing copies is therefore an infringement
unless it is for the importer's own use. American books may be lawfully
published in America. But when the copies of those publications are imported
into this country, an action for infringement would lie in this country
against the importer in respect of those copies. An action would also lie
against any person who for instance sold or distributed such copies here.
Because the books have been imported and sold without the license of the owner
of the copyright or his exclusive licensee.

(23) "infringing copy" is defined in section 2(m). An infringing copy means a
copy "imported in contravention of the provisions of the Act." The central
provision in section 51 which says that copyright shall be deemed to be
infrirged where any person without a license granted by owner of the copyright
"does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred upon
the owner of the copyright." The owner of the copyright or his licensee has
the "exclusive right" of printing, or otherwise multiplying, publishing and
vending copies of the copyrighted literary production in India. India
Distributors are infringing this right. Therefore, India Distributors are
dealers in "infringing copies". They are handling unlicensed copies.

(24) This is abundantly made clear by the Act in Section 53(1). It empowers
the Registrar of Copyrights to "order that copies made out of India of the
work which if made in India would infringe copyright shall not be imported."
This is the acid test. It is a misuse of words to say that the expression
"infringing copy" has one meaning in section 51(b)(iv) and a different in
Section 53. The essence of the thing is unauthorised appropriation or use of
another man's property. It amounts to taking what is not yours. It is an
improper use of that which does not belong to you. It has been well said :
"The position of the person dealing in infringing copies is in fact similar to
that of the 'receiver', the person dealing in stolen property. (S. M. Steward
International Copyright 1983 ed. p. 80). In importation it is the locals that
matters. Territorial division and geographical area are of importance. Outside
a defined territory the sale of a copyrighted work constitutes a sale of an
"infringing copy". Because there is infringement of territorial restrictions.
Penguins' case is that they hold a territorially exclusive license coupled
with an interest so far as India is concerned. Generally speaking, whenever
there is misappropriation of intellectual property of which the primary
beneficiary is the copyright owner there is infringement of copyright.
Copyright is a property right. Throughout the world it is regarded as a form
of property worthy of social protection in the ultimate public interest. The
law starts from the premise that protection should be as long and as broad as
possible and should provide only those exceptions and limitation which are
essential in the public interest. The courts adopt a "purposive" approach to
statutes.

(25) Importation of "infringing copies" is prohibited by the Act. Because if
made in India these titles would infringe the copyright of Penguins. Not only
this. India Distributors arc "publishing" these titles. Publication means in
the case of a Iiterary work, "the issue of copies of the work, either in whole
or in part, to the public in a manner sufficient to satisfy the reasonable
requirements of the public having regard to the nature of the work." (Section
3 as amended by the Copyright (Amendment) Act 1983). The Act treats
infringement of copyright as "infringement of a right" in property. Copyrights
considered as unique forms of property and monopoly, are essentiality
pecuniary rights. In its most elementary form copyright means "the exclusive
right to multiply copies of a book."

(26) It is true that India Distributors are not printing these books and are
not guilty of what Is called primary infringement. But when they issue copies
of these titles for public distribution they are guilty of secondary
infringement. The Lading case on the point is Time-Life International
(Nederlands) v. Interstate Parcel Express Co. Pvt. Ltd. (1978) Fsr 251). The
High Court of Australia construed the Australian Copyright Act which for
present purposes is substantially the same as; our Act. The court held that an
importer who purchased books in the United States of America from the American
licensee of the copyright infringed the Australian Act by importing the books
into Australia without the license of the Australian licensee. The importer
argued that he had an implied license to import and sell .the books by reason
of the sale in America in the ordinary course of business without any
restriction upon resale. It was held that here was no license, express or
implied, that the buyer of a subject to copyright obtained rights no more and
no less than the buyer of any other chattel, and that the rights which flowed
from the acquisition of ownership and possession dies not revelve any implied
license. The same view was taken by the court of Appeal in England in Polydor
Ltd. v. Harlequin Record Shop, (1980) Fsr 362(6).

(27) Thirdly counsel for India Distributors argued that the suit was a
misconceived remedy and Penums remedy, if any, lay with the Registrar of
Copyrights, He strongly relied on section 53 which says :

"53(1) The Registrar of Copyrights, on application by the owner of the
copyright in any work or by his duly authorised agent and on payment of the
prescribed fee, may after making such inquiry as he deems fit, order that
copies made out of India of the work which if made in India would infring
copyright shall not be imported..

(2)Subject to any rules made under this Act. the Registrar of Copyrights or
any person authorised by him in this behalf may inter any ship, dock or
premises where any such copies as arc refened to in subsection ( 1) may be
found and may examine such copies.

(3)All copies to which any order made under subsection ( 1) applies shall b&
deemed to be goods of which the import has been prohibited or restricted under
section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 and all the provisions of that Act
shall have effect accordingly.

Provided that all such copies confiscated under the provisions of the said Act
shall not vest in the Government but shall be delivered to the owner of the
copyright in the work."

(28) We were referred to Gramophone Co. of India v. Birendra Bahadur Pandey,
in this connection.

(29) In my opinion this argument is meritless. Section 53 gives an additional
remedy. It empowers the Registrar to ter any ship, dock or premises where the
copies of which import is prohibited are to be found. He can confiscate such
copies. The copies so confiscated do not vest in the Government but are to be
delivered to the owner of the copyright in the work. This section deals with
what Mr. Fysh called the "godown situation" where on the tip received from the
owner of the copyright (who must apply to him) the Registrar of Copyright is
given the power to confiscate copies from the ship, dock or premises where any
such copies of which import is prohibited may be stored. Unless specific
information can be given about importations which are expected to occur the
Registrar cannot act.

(30) Section 53 is no bar to the owner of the copyright or licensee from
claiming "civil remedies" for infringement of copyright given in Ch. XII.
Section 53 cannot be called a "civil remedy" notwithstanding the fact that the
Registrar is enjoined to make an 'inquiry' into the matter of importation of
"infringing copies" under section 53. The 'inquiry' is at best quasijudicial.
It cannot be equated with a judicial or "civil remedy" "conferred by law for
the infringement of a right". (Section 55).

(31) If copyright is to possess any value to its owner, it must be capable of
enforcement. Laws in general are enforced in one of two ways : (i) publicly,
by means of the police, custom officers, or similar agency, such as Registrar
of Copyright, or (ii) privately by legal action taken by the person who
suffers from any breaches of the law. Most copyright law falls into the second
category, for copyright is in essence a private legal right. It is for the
owner of the copyright to go to court to prevent a wrong from taking place or
to seek redress when a wrong has taken place. It is for the copyright owner to
seek a 'civil remedy' for any infringement (actual or potential) of his legal
interest. (Whale on Copyright (1983) ed. P. 119).

(32) Section 53 deals with importation of prohibited goods. This is why the
Sea Customs Act, now of 1962 has been made applicable. Under Rule 23 the
Registrar of Copyrights acts in collaboration with the Customs Authorities. In
the inquiry the Registrar decides whether a copy is an "infringing copy" and
whether its import is prohibited. If he finds importation is prohibited he
confiscates the copies. Section 51, on the other hand, deals with infringement
of copyright. For infringement "civil remedies" are given in section 55. They
are injunctions, damages and accounts. Confiscation is not provided. Nor has
the Customs Act any application. Confiscation is provided in section 53 by
Registrar and in section 65 by magistrate dealing with offences. So the nature
of the remedy is different. It is true that in each case the common factor is
an 'infringing copy'. But remedies are different. Under section 53 it is
confiscation. In section 51 injunction, damages and accounts. In section 66
imprisonment, fine and delivery of infring copies to the copyright owner.

(33) I have therefore no hesitation in rejecting the argument that suit is not
competent.

(34) Counsel for the India Distributors referred us to inc decision of House
of Lords in Infabrics Ltd. v. Jaytex Ltd., 1981 (1) All E R 1057(8). These
were the facts. I, was the copyright owner of a fabric design J. saw a fabric
in Hong Kong which he imported, made into shorts and sold. He continued
selling some shirts after he received a letter before action informing that I
owned the copyright in the design and that the Hong Kong fabric was an
infringement. It was held that conversion damages were assessable on the full
retail value of the shirts.

(35) In that case the court held that section 49(2) (e) of the English
Copyright Act of 1956 referred only to the meaning of 'publication' for the
purpose of deciding whether an original work was published, and not for the
purpose of ascertaining whether an allegedly infringing work constituted a
publication of that original work. The House ruled that 'publishing' for the
purpose of infringement, simply meant making public what had previously been
unpublished. Thus the making of copies of a work already published will not
constitute infringement on the ground of 'publishing' the work.

(36) This case, in my opinion, does not help India Distnoutors. In the English
Act there is no definition of "publication' as is given in section 3 of the
Indian Act. Issue of copies for public distribution is publication. Of
publication in India the right is given to Penguins under an exclusive
license. What matters is the issue of copies in India for purposes of
infringement. Whether they have already been published lawfully in America is
of little consequence. The importation, sale and public distribution of
American editions constitute infringement of copyright of the exclusive
licensee.

(37) While publication generally refers to issue to public. importation for
the specified purpose may be a necessary step in the process of issuing to the
public, and therefore of publishing. It appears to me that the exclusive right
of Penguins to print, publish and sell these titles in India would extend to
the exclusive right to import copies into India for the purpose of selling or
by way of trade offering or exposing for sale the hooks in question. [Time-
Life (supra) p. 267]. This is the true meaning of the word 'publish' as used
in section 14(1)(a)(4).

(38) It is also an infringement of copyright knowingly to import into India
for sale or hire infringing copies of a work without the consent of the owner
of the copyright, though they may have been made by or with the consent of the
owner of the copyright in the place where they wore made. In America the
subject books v/ere lawfully published, it is true. But they cannot cross the
borders of India without infringing the copyright of -the exclusive licensee.
[See Clarke Irwin & Co. Ltd. v. C. Code Co. Ltd., 22 Dlr (2nd) p. 183. 186
(Canada)] (39) Counsel for the defendants next argued that prohibition to
import these American publications into India will be in breach of the
provisions of Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act. I am not
impressed by this argument. It is true that copyright is a monopoly, 6ut all
monopolies are not evil. This monopoly is a statutory creature. (See section
16). Copyright is the creation of the Act. As at present advised I am not
prepared to hold that these provisions are in conflict with the statutory
provisions contained in the Monopolies Act or the Contract Act.

(40) After the conclusion of arguments we asked parties counsel to address us
on the question of jurisdiction in view of the fact that section 62 of the Act
requires suit or other civil proceeding in respect of the infringement of
copyright to be instituted in the district court having jurisdiction. We heard
arguments. The consistent view of the courts in India is that the expression
'district court' will include the High Court having original jurisdiction.
[See section 2(4), Code of Civil Procedure and Bakshi Lochan Singh v. Jathedar
Santokh Singh, 2nd (1971) I Delhi 615 (10). The Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. v.
Hansa Chemical Pharmacy, (1979) 2nd 2 Delhi 236 (11), D.C.S. Bureau v. United
Concern, and Maheshwar Swain v. Bidyut Prabha Art Press, .

(41) Last but not the least important is the question of balance of
convenience. Counsel for Penguins submitted that in copyright actions
temporary injunctions are usually sought and granted since damages are rarely
an' adequate remedy. Counsel for India Distributors, on the other hand, argued
that the learned judge had ordered them to maintain accounts and that was
sufficient to safeguard the interest of Penguins pending trial.

(42) In American Cyanamid v. Ethicon, (1975) Ac 396 (14) the House of Lords
laid down the process through which it should go before granting an injunction
(1)Is there aserious issue to be tried ? If there is not no injunction will be
issued. If there is, then the court moves to the second question;

(2)If the plaintiff can be adequately compensated by damages at trial no
injunction will be issued. If the defendant can be adequately compensated at
trial by the plaintiff's undertaking to pay the defendant his damages, then an
injunction should be ordered.

(3)If there is no clear answer to either question them the court should
attempt to determine whether the defendant would suffer greater inconvenience
if the injunction were granted, or the plaintiff if it is not granted. This is
known as the 'balance, of convenience* test.

(4)It is only if the 'balance of convenience' test does not resolve the matter
that the court should look at the relative strength of the parties' case as
revealed by their affidavit evidence.

(43) Applying these principles to the facts of this case find that the balance
of convenience is in favor of Penguins. There is prima facie an infringement
of an "exclusive right". A continuance or repetition of infringement is
threatened in future as well. In such circumstances the injured owner of an
"exclusive right" may demand that the state of affairs which is contrary to
law be rectified. He can ask for injunction restraining the party threatening
the infringement. India Book Distributors have recently set up their business
after separating from India Book House in 1980 or thereabout. Counsel for
India Book Distributors told us this. In a publication of the British Council
entitled "British Publishers' representatives in India" at p. 56 India Book
Distributors Bombay are shown as the principal concern of which Calcutta,
Madras and New Delhi offices are shown as "branches". This is controverter by
India Book Distributors Bombay who claim that these are separate concerns.
This may or may not be so. Whether they are one or different all must be
restrained if I hold that Penguins are entitled to injunction.

(44) As most infringements of copyrights consist of a continous process of
successive infringing acts such as importation of 'infringing copies' as in
this case, the most important remedy and in many cases the only effective one
is the injunction. This is always in the discretion of the court and the court
has to weigh the possible damage to the plaintiff if the injunction is not
granted against the possible damage to the defendant if it is granted. "Thus
once the infringement and its continuance is proved the plaintiff will usually
be entitled to an injunction, but the injunction would not be granted if the
damage caused to the defendant by granting the injunction would be out of all
proportion to the seriousness of the infringement or to the possible damage to
the plaintiff.

(45) Here is a case of indirect infringement which the India Distributors are
committing by importation and sale of titles of which the exclusive licensees
are Penguins so far as India is concerned. They have prima facie shown to us
that (a) They are the exclusive licensees from the copyright owners, and (b)
that the India Distributors are handling "infringing copies" knowingly because
even after notice dated 3-4-83 was seized on them by Penguins they did not
stop sale and importation. They were not prepared to remove the cause of
complaint by discontinuing the sale of those titles. The most telling
circumstance in this case is that the American editions which are Infringing
copies are being sold at lower prices than the British Penguins in this
country.

(46) Ignorance is not a defense before us. The burden of proof in copyright
infringement cases is on the defendant. He has to show that he did not know or
had no reasonable grounds for suspecting that the copies in his possession
which he was importing, buying or selling were infringing copies. [See proviso
to section 55(1) and section 51(a)(ii)]. This is not the defendants' case
before us.

(47) In actions for infringement of copyright damages are often not an
adequate remedy since there are difficulties in both ascertaining and
quantifying such damage as injury to the plaintiff's property, business and
goodwill (Copinger Copyright 12th ed p. 623). This applies to Penguins who can
justly complain of injury to their worldwide business and goodwill. Some of
the titles in question are highly topical titles. Penguins is a household word
in English speaking countries. This is a measure of their goodwill. Taking
into account the relative strength of each party's case as revealed by
affidavit evidence adduced on the hearing of the application I think this is a
case in which injunction is the proper remedy. I am of opinion that balance of
convenience lies in granting rather than refusing injunction.

(48) It was said that if injunction is issued India Distributors will lose
their import licenses. The short answer to this is that the court cannot be a
party to infringements of rights in order that the defendants' import
entitlements do not diminish. Dealing in infringing copies is not a lawful
trade. I would restrain the commission and continuance of the wrongful act.

(49) For these reasons I would set aside the order dated 2-8-83. I would allow
the appeal and issue an injunction restraining defendants I to 4 by
themselves, their servants, agents, dealers, stockists from infringing the
plaintiffs' territorial copyrights/rights/license by importing, distributing
and offering for sale in India the 13 titles which admittedly they are
importing into India. I would permit the defendants to sell their existing
stocks as on the date of this order. But no further imports will be made. The
defendants will keep accounts of the sale of the existing stocks and submit
the same in court every three months. They will also submit an account of
their existing stocks within a week.

(50) The plaintiffs are ordered to furnish within one month a bank guarantee
in the sum of Rs. one lakh as a cross-undertaking in damages for the loss
which the defendants may sustain in case the plaintiffs fail in the suit.

(51) The learned judge awarded heavy costs against the plaintiffs. I think the
proper way to deal with costs of this appeal and the costs below is to make
them costs in. the cause. If the plaintiffs succeed in the suit they will get
their costs. If they fail they will have to pay them.

(52) One word more before I hold my peace. In an interlocutory appeal the loss
said about the merits of the case the better. Needless to say that what I have
said here will not prejudice either party at the trial.

(53) I would order an expeditious trial.

