

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Bangalore

Google India Private Limited, ... vs The Deputy Commissioner Of Income ... on
11 May, 2018

    
    
                   IN THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                           "C" BENCH : BANGALORE
    
       BEFORE SHRI SUNIL KUMAR YADAV, JUDICIAL MEMBER
        AND SHRI INTURI RAMA RAO, ACCOUNTANT MEMBER
    
                                Assessee's Appeal
    
        Appeal Nos. &
                                            Appellant                        Respondent
       Assessment Years
    IT(IT)A No.1190/Bang/2014   M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Joint Director of Income
             2013-14            No.3, RMZ Infinity Tower-E,          Tax (International Taxation),
                                4th Floor, Old Madras Road,          Range - 1,
                                Bengaluru - 560 016.                 Bengaluru.
                                PAN : AACCG 0527 D
    IT(TP)A No.374/Bang/2013    M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Additional Commissioner
            2008-09             PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   of Income Tax,
                                                                     Range 11, Bengaluru.
    IT(IT)A No.2845/Bang/2017   M/s. Google Ireland Limited,         The Deputy Commissioner of
             2007-08            C/o. PricewaterhouseCoopers Pvt.     Income Tax (IT), Circle 1(1),
                                Ltd., Building No.10, Tower - C,     Bengaluru.
                                18th Floor, DLF Cyber City,
                                Gurgaon - 122 002.
                                PAN : AADCG 7672 A
    IT(IT)A No.949/Bang/2017    M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Deputy Commissioner of
             2014-15            PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   Income Tax (International
                                                                     Taxation), Circle 1(1),
                                                                     Bengaluru.
    IT(IT)A No.950/Bang/2017    M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Deputy Commissioner of
             2015-16            PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   Income Tax (International
                                                                     Taxation), Circle 1(1),
                                                                     Bengaluru.
    IT(TP)A No. 68/Bang/2015    M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Deputy Commissioner of
            2010-11             PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   Income Tax, Circle 3(1)(2),
                                                                     Bengaluru - 560 001.
    IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017    M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Assistant Commissioner of
            2012-13             PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   Income Tax,
                                                                     Circle 3(1)(2),
                                                                     Bengaluru - 560 095.
    IT(TP)A No.559/Bang/2016    M/s. Google India Private Limited,   The Deputy Commissioner of
            2011-12             PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   Income Tax,Circle 3(1)(2),
                                                                     Bengaluru - 560 095.
    IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014     M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,         The Deputy Commissioner of
            2009-10             PAN : AACCG 0527 D                   Income Tax, Circle 11(3),
                                                                     Bengaluru - 560 001.
                                              IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
                                               IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
                                                    IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
                                                                             IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
    
                                          Page 2 of 331
    
                                       Revenue's Appeal
    
         Appeal Nos. &
                                            Appellant                            Respondent
        Assessment Years
    IT(IT)A No.1295/Bang/2014 The Deputy Director of Income            M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,
             2013-14          Tax (International Taxation),            Bengaluru - 560 016.
                              Circle 1(1), Bengaluru                   PAN : AACCG 0527 D
    IT(TP)A No.466/Bang/2013 The Deputy Commissioner of                M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,
             2008-09          Income Tax,                              PAN : AACCG 0527 D
                              Circle - 11(3), Bengaluru.
    IT(TP)A No. 191/Bang/2014 The Deputy Commissioner of               M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,
             2009-10          Income Tax,                              PAN : AACCG 0527 D
                              Circle - 11(3), Bengaluru.
    IT(TP)A No.205/Bang/2015 The Deputy Commissioner of                M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,
             2010-11          Income Tax,                              PAN : AACCG 0527 D
                              Circle - 3(1)(2), Bengaluru.
      ITA No.1299/Bang/2015   The Deputy Commissioner of               M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,
             2010-11          Income Tax,                              PAN : AACCG 0527 D
                              Circle - 3(1)(2), Bengaluru.
    IT(TP)A No.881/Bang/2016 The Deputy Commissioner of                M/s. Google India Pvt. Ltd.,
             2011-12          Income Tax,                              PAN : AACCG 0527 D
                              Circle - 3(1)(2), Bengaluru.
    
    
     Assessee by           :   Shri Percy Pardiwala, Sr. Counsel,
                               Shri. Anmol Anand, Advocate,
                               Shri. Vinay Mangla, CA
                               Shri. Padamchand Kincha, CA
                               Shri. Narendra Jain, Advocate
     Revenue by            :   Shri. C. H. Sundar Rao, CIT - I,
                               Shri. K. V. Arvind, Sr. Standing Counsel for Department.
    
                    Dates of hearing      : 03.04.2018
                                            04.04.2018
                                            05.04.2018
                                            19.04.2018
                    Date of Pronouncement : 11.05.2018
                                               IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
                                                IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
                                                     IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
                                                                              IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
    
                                           Page 3 of 331
    
    
                                         ORDER
    

PerBench These appealsare preferred by the assessees as well as the Revenue
against the respective orders of the CIT(A) pertaining to assessment years
2007-2008 to 2015-2016.

Since the issues involved in these appeals are interconnected and
interrelated, these were heard together and are being adjudicated through this
single consolidated order for the sake of convenience. We, however, prefer to
adjudicate them one after the other as under:

2\. IT(IT)A Nos. 1190/Bang/2014, 949&950/Bang/2017 Though grounds raised in
these appeals are almost similar, but for the sake of reference we extract the
grounds raised in ITA No.1190/Bang/2014 as under:

Based on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld CIT(A) and the
Ld AO have:

1 Erred in holding the payment made by the Appellant to Google Ireland Limited
in relation to purchase of advertisement space for resale to the advertisers
in India under the Google AdWords Reseller Agreement ('the Agreement') to be
in the nature of 'Royalty' under the Act and the India- Ireland Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement (`lndia-lreland Treaty') stating that the issue
is covered under the appeals for earlier years.

2\. Erred in holding that the amount payable towards purchase of advertisement
space to be in the nature of 'Royalty' under the Act, even after acknowledging
that the Appellant is distributing/reselling the advertisement space to the
advertisers in India.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 4 of 331

3\. Erred in holding the amount payable by the Appellant to Google Ireland
Limited as Royalty by attributing the same towards right to use of Trademark,
even after concluding that the assesse company was permitted to use the
trademarks of Google for the purpose of marketing and distribution of AdWords
program.

4 Erred in holding that the AdWords program is complex computer software, the
right to use has been granted to the Appellant without appreciating the fact
that AdWords program is a standard advertisement service through which the
advertiser is able to advertise its products or services on the Google
website.

5\. Erred in holding that Google Ireland Limited has granted the Appellant the
right to use of the AdWords program, which is a complex computer program
without parting with the copyright, thus granting licence to use the software
without appreciating the fact that the Appellant is only involved in marketing
and distribution/resale of the advertisement space to the advertisers in
India.

6\. Erred in holding that the training provided in relation to the
advertisement program, its functionality, tools available etc. to the
distribution team of the appellant who markets and distributes the same to
advertisers in India tantamount to rendering of services to the Appellant even
after concluding that such training is restricted to use of the AdWords
program and not how to develop the AdWords program.

7\. Erred in confirming that the distribution rights granted under the
distribution/ reseller agreement are itself -IP rights" covered by "similar
property" used in Sec 9(1)(vi) of the Act, after holding that as per the
distribution/reseller agreement Google Ireland Limited has agreed to provide
advertisement space to the Appellant through AdWords program for distribution
to the Indian Advertisers.

8\. Erred in confirming that Distribution Agreement/Reseller Agreement cannot
be read without the service agreement (ITES agreement) between the Appellant
and Google Ireland Limited and the Appellant has been granted right to use
intellectual property owned by Google Ireland Limited without IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 5 of 331 appreciating the fact that ITES
service agreement is a separate agreement under which the Appellant performs
an independent global outsourcing function for Google Ireland Limited for
which it receives arm's length consideration and is not linked in any manner
to the function of sale of advertisement space to the Indian advertisers being
performed by the Appellant.

9\. Without appreciating the facts of the case, erred in holding that the
amount payable by the Appellant to Google Ireland Limited towards purchase of
advertisement space to be in the nature of 'Royalty' under Section 9(1)(vi) of
the Act.

10\. Erred in upholding the order of the Ld JDIT that the amount payable by
the Appellant to Google Ireland Limited is towards right to use of trademark
and copyrighted computer program and process. hence is in the nature of
'Royalty' as per the Article 12 of the India Ireland Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement.

11\. Erred in not following the principle laid down by Hon'ble Mumbai Tribunal
in the case of Yahoo India Pvt Ltd (140 TTJ (Mumbai) 195) and Pinstorm
Technologies Pvt Ltd (2012) 54 SOT 78 (Mumbai) on similar facts by stating
that the facts and issues are completely different and at no stage the Mumbai
Tribunal consider what exactly is the AdWords Program, nor did it have
occasion to examine the right to use trademark or other IP rights.

12\. Erred in not following the decision of the Calcutta Tribunal in the case
of Income Tax Officer vs Right Florists Pvt Ltd (ITA No.1336/Ko1/2011) on
similar facts.

The Appellant craves, to consider each of the above grounds of appeal without
prejudice to one another and craves leave to add, alter, delete or modify all
or any of the above grounds of appeal.

3\. In IT(IT)A Nos.949 &950/Bang/2017,the appellant has also assailed the
order of the CIT(A) denying the benefit of beneficial ownership by raising
following commongrounds:-

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 6 of 331 Beneficial ownership
> of payments under the DTAA Not adhering to the rule of consistency by not
> following the Ld CIT(A)'s decision for AY 203-14 in the Appellant's very own
> case and taking contradictory views without considering:

>  Certificates issued by the Irish Revenue Authorities stating that GIL is a
> tax resident of Ireland and its world-wide income is taxed in Ireland  Fact
> that there was neither any change in facts of the Appellant vis-à-vis the
> previous year nor was any new material fact brought on record by the Ld AO 
> Not providing an opportunity of being heard to the Appellant and thereby
> violating principles of natural justice  Rule of consistency requires that
> when contradictory views are taken vis-à-vis the previous years, reasons for
> such contradictory views would need to be specified

> 4\. During the course of pendency of the appeal, assessee has also moved an
> application for the admission of the following additional grounds:

"Withholding liability on Royalty to arise only on payment basis under the
India-Ireland Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement ('DTAA')

13\. Without prejudice to the argument that the payments made by the Appellant
to Google Ireland are not in the nature of Royalty as per Article 12 of India-
Ireland DTAA, the Learned Assessing Officer / Learned Commissioner of Income-
Tax (Appeals) erred in holding that the Appellant is liable to withhold tax on
amounts payable to Google Ireland disregarding that 'Royalty' income for a
non-resident is taxable only on receipt basis under the India-Ireland DTAA.

The Appellant craves, to consider the above ground of appeal without prejudice
to other grounds of appeal and craves leave to add, alter, delete or modify
the above ground of appeal."

5\. Though various grounds are raised but they all relate to the
characterization of the payment made by the appellant to M/s. Google Ireland
Ltd., with regard to purchase of IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 7 of 331 advertisement space for resale to the advertisers in India under
the Google AdWords program distribution agreement. The facts in all these
years are almost similar subject to variation in quantum. Therefore, we record
the facts for the assessment year 2013-14 in IT(IT)A No. 1190/Bang/2014. The
facts in brief borne out from the record in this regard are that the assessee
company i.e., Google India Pvt. Ltd., (hereinafter called as "GIPL"), having
its registered office at Bangalore was incorporated on 16.12.2003, as a wholly
owned subsidiary of Google International LLC, US. The GIPL is engaged in the
business of providing Information Technology (IT) and Information Technology
enabled Services (ITES) to its group companies. It also acts as a distributor
for AdWord programs in India.

The assessee company's activities was classified by the CIT(A) in its order in
3 segments which are as under:

 IT services :- GIPL has entered into a service agreement with Google Inc to
render software development services.Google India's research and development
units at Bangalore, Hyderabad and Gurgaon provide IT services including
application development, maintenance and testing services. For these services,
GIPL, is remunerated at cost plus 17.5%  IT enabled services :- GIPL has
entered into a service agreement with Google Ireland Limited (Google Ireland)
to render IT enabled services. Its service centre at Hyderabad and Gurgaon
provide IT enabled services relating to the administration of advertisements
in accordance with the guidelines provided by Google Ireland and provide
customer support services. For these services, GIPL is remunerated at cost
plus 15.5%.

 Marketing and distribution services for the AdWords program :- Under the
Google AdWords Program Distribution Agreement dated 12.12.2005 (Agreement)
entered into between GIPL and Google Ireland, Google India is appointed as a
non-exclusive authorised distributor of AdWords program to the advertisers in
India.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 8 of 331

6\. The main issue raised in this appeal is with regard to the non-deduction
of TDS on payments made by the appellant to M/s. Google Ireland Ltd., as the
AO characterized the payment made by the appellant to M/s. Google Ireland
Ltd., as royalty. Under the Adword Program distribution agreement, the
agreement was entered into between GIPL and Google Ireland Ltd., (hereinafter
called as "GIL). The GIPL was granted the marketing and distribution rights of
Adwords Program to advertisers in India and the GIPL is remunerated on cost
plus market basis for the distribution services under Adword Programs.

7\. On verification of the financial statements for the assessment year
2012-13, the AO noticed that GIPL had credited a sum of Rs.111,491,99,289/- to
the account of M/s. Google Ireland Ltd., (GIL) without deduction of tax at
source. The GIL had also not obtained the Nil deduction certificate on the
sums payable to it from the department. Reliance upon the provisions of
section 195 of the IT Act (hereinafter called as an "Act") was placed
according to which any person responsible for paying to non-

resident, not being a company, or to a foreign company, any interest or any
other sum chargeable under provisions of the Act (not being income chargeable
under the head salaries) shall at the time of credit of such income to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment there-of in cash or by the
issue of cheque or draft by any other mode IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 9 of 331 whichever is earlier, deduct income tax
thereon at the rates in force, and the AO issued a show cause notice to the
appellant (GIPL) as to why he should not be treated as assessee in default in
respect of tax not deducted at source on sums payable to GIL under section
201(1) of the Act. The GIPL was asked to furnish details of sums paid or
payable for the financial year 2012-13, relevant to the impugned assessment
year and the deduction of tax at source thereon. In response thereto, the
assessee has filed the submissions where from it was noticed by the AO that
during the impugned assessment year, GIPL had credited a sum of
Rs.111,491,99,289/- to the account of GIL towards marketing and distribution
rights of Adword Program without deduction of tax at source. A sum of
Rs.795,28,87,731/- had been remitted during the financial year 2012-13 and the
balance of Rs.319,63,11,558/- was outstanding.

8\. The AO has further observed that assessee company is an Indian company and
the payee is foreign company based in Ireland, with their residential status
being that of non-

resident and as per section 5(2) of the Act, the total income of any previous
year of any person who is a non-resident includes all incomes from whatever
source derived which is

(a) is received or is deemed to have been received in India in such year or by
or on behalf of such person or (b) accrued or arised or is deemed to have been
accrued or arised to him in India during such year.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 10 of 331

9\. The AO further observed that section 9 of the Act deals with the income
deemed to accrue or arise in India and as per section 9(1)(vi) of the Act,
inter alia, any income by way of royalty payable by a person who is a
resident, shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India to the recipient except
where the royalty is payable in respect of any right, property or information
used or services utilised for the purpose of business or profession, carried
on by such person outside India or for the purpose of making or earning any
income from any source outside India.

10\. The AO accordingly issued a show cause to the assessee to explain as to
why the sum payable to GIL towards marketing and distribution rights of Adword
Programme should not be treated as royalty as per provisions of section
9(1)(vi) of the Act. Assessee was also show caused to explain as to why
provision of section 201(1) should not be invoked in this case and it be
treated as assessee in default in respect of the tax not deducted at source.
In response to show cause notice, the appellant filed the submissions on
various dates where from it was observed by the AO that under the distribution
agreement, the GIPL has acquired marketing and distribution rights over Adword
Programmes for the territory of India from GIL. The distribution of Adword
Programme involves 3 parties i.e., Licensor, the reseller or distributor and
the advertiser. In this case, the licensor is GIL, the distributor or reseller
is GIPL and the end users are the advertisers.

The assessee has taken a stand that the amount payable to the GIL is not in
the nature of IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 11 of 331
royalty either under the Act or the India-Ireland Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement (hereinafter called as "DTAA"). The gist of submissions made by the
GIPL are extracted by the AO in his order and for the sake of reference, we
extract the same as under:

>  As per Agreement between the assessee company and Google Ireland, GIPL is
> appointed as a mere non-exclusive Distributor/Reseller of AdWords program to
> the advertisers in India;

>  Distribution fee is payable to Google Ireland on distribution of AdWords
> inIndia and is not in relation to any 'transfer of any right' or any 'right
> to use' any patent/ invention etc.;

>  The Agreement does not involve any use of patents, invention, model,
> design, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar property.
> Further, all the rights, title and interest in and to all information & data
> including the user data (i.e. data provided by users) are owned by Google
> Ireland;

>  Further, the distribution fee payable under the Agreement is not in
> relation to any knowledge concerning a patent or invention and is neither
> concerned with use or right to use of any scientific equipment.

>  Reliance was placed on decisions of the Hon'ble Mumbai ITAT in the case of
> Pin storm Technologies Private Limited v. ITO(ITA No 4332/Mum/2009) and
> Yahoo India Pvt Ltd v DCIT [(2011) 59 DIR 1].

>  Therefore the sums paid/payable are not taxable under the Income Tax
> Act,1961 ("Act") and India-Ireland DTAA.

11\. The AO has examined the explanations and the submissions explaining the
functioning of the appellant but was not convinced with the contentions of the
assessees and he concluded that the payments made by the assessee to GIL is
the royalty payment for which assessee is under obligation to deduct tax at
source as stipulated under section 195 of the IT Act. Since the assessee
failed to discharge its obligations, the asesssee company/GIPL was held to be
assessee in default in respect of tax not deducted at source IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 12 of 331 on amounts credited to GIL. The AO
accordingly worked out the tax liability of the appellant under section 201(1)
and 201(1A) for the impugned assessment year and issued a demand notice of
Rs.258,84,40,845/-.

12\. Besides, it was also held by the AO that GIL is not the beneficial owner
of the amounts received/receivable from the appellant in relation to sale of
advertisement space under the agreement on the ground that Google Inc., owns
the search engine and Adword Programm and other hodings are also involved in
Adword program and are entitled to share the revenue generated under the
Adword agreement

13\. Aggrieved, assessee preferred an appeal before the CIT(A) and the CIT(A),
on the point of characterization of the payment made by GIPL to GIL has held
that it is a royalty payment, following its earlier order for the assessment
year 2006-07 to 2012-13. Since there is no discussion in the order of the
CIT(A) while holding the nature of payment by GIPL to GIL as royalty, except
the reference of its earlier order for assessment year 2006-

07 to 2012-13,we are required to examine the findings given by the CIT(A) in
that order.

The order of the CIT(A) for 2006-07 to 2012-13 has already been confirmed by
the Tribunal against which an appeal is pending before the Hon'ble High Court
of Karnataka.

The Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka has passed orders in ITA Nos.879/2017 and
898/2017 dated 15..2017 and 20.11.2017 respectively that the present appeals
are to be disposed off independently without being influenced with the order
of the Tribunal dated IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 13 of 331 23.10.2017 passed for the assessment years 2006-07 to 2012-13.
Therefore, we cannot look to the order of the Tribunal for assessment years
2006-07 to 2012-13, confirming the order of the CIT(A) in this regard but we
are supposed to adjudicate the issues of nature of payment in the light of the
finding of CIT(A) for assessment year 2006-07 to 2012-13 independently as it
was relied on by the CIT(A) while adjudicating the impugned issue without
being influenced by the order of the Tribunal. In appeal filed before the
CIT(A) against the assessment orders for assessment years 2006-07 to 2012-13,
the assessee has disputed the findings of the AO with regard to nature of
payment made by GIPL to GIL.

14\. The CIT(A) while adjudicating the characterization of nature of payment
made by GIPL to GIL, has examined and analysed the agreement entered into by
the assessee/appellant with GIL and Google AdWord Programs how it operates in
the light of information available on internet and also in the light of
various judicial pronouncements rendered by the Tribunal and held that nature
of payment made by GIPL to GIL is royalty. The relevant observation of the
CIT(A) are extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:

"Before I proceed to examine the issues raised before me, it is pertinent to
give a proper finding with respect to the Adwords program. From the discussion
reproduced in the body of this order, it is very clear that the Adword program
is actually computer software by which the advertiser is able to publish an
advertisement on the "Google Website". And it is after utilizing a complex
computer program, the clients gain access to the advertiser's webpage. The
contention of the assessee that AdWords is an automated, self-serve system
through which IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 14 of 331
advertisers independently develop a set of keywords that relate to their
business and manage their own account online from the Goodie website and
therefore, it has simply rented out space on the "Goodie Website" and charged
the advertiser as newspapers are akin to doing, is a fallacy. It is evident
that the Adwords program is a complex computer program developed and owned by
Google Ireland. A computer programme is a process when it executes
instructions lying in it in passive state. It is • built upon and uses
sophisticated computer technology as under:-

"The AdWords system was initially implemented on top of the MySQL database
engine. After the system had been launched, management decided to use Oracle
instead. The system became much slower, so eventually it was returned to
MySQL. Eventually, Google developed a custom distributed Relational database
management .system (RDBMS) known as Google Fl specifically for the needs of
the Ad business, which requires strong consistency, high scalability across
data centers and powerful SQL queries. The interface has also been revamped to
offer better work flow with additional new features, such as Spreadsheet
Editing, Search Query Reports, and better conversion metrics."

10.2. Google Fl is a Relational Database Management System and it is
undoubtedly a computer program within the meaning of the Act as is evident
from the following illustration:-

10.3. As per Wikipedia, a computer program, or just a program, is a sequence
of instructions, written to perform a specified task with a computer. A
computer requires programs to function, typically executing the program's
instructions in a central processor. The program has an executable form that
the computer can use directly to execute the instructions. The same program in
its human-readable source code form, from which executable programs are
derived (e.g., compiled), enables a programmer to study and develop its
algorithms. A collection of computer programs and related data is referred to
as the software.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 15 of 331 10.4. The definition
of computer program in the copyright Act of 1957, is as under:

"Section 2(ffc) "computer programme" means a set of instructions expressed in
words, codes, schemes or in any other form, Including a machine readable
medium, capable of causing a computer to perform a particular task or achieve
a particular result."

10.5. In a recent decision, the Delhi Bench of the Hon'ble Tribunal in
Gracemac Corporation v. Assistant Director of Income-tax 008 ITR (Trib) 522
had an occasion to examine the term "Computer Program" vis-a-vis the term
"Process" used in the Act as well as the Indo-US Tax Treaty and observed "It
is a golden rule of interpretation of statutes that the language of the
statute should be read as it is. The intention of the Legislature is primarily
to be gathered from the language used, which means that attention should be
paid to what has been said as also to what has not been said. As a consequence
a construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of
words or which results in rejection of words as meaningless has to be avoided.

Director General, Telecommunication v. T. N. Peethambaram [1986] 4 SCC 348
relied on. The use of punctuation marks cannot be said redundant.

The need for interpretation arises when words used in the statute are, on
their own terms, ambivalent and do not manifest the intention of the
Legislature. Where the word is plain and unambiguous, it is not for judges to
invent fancied ambiguities as an excuse for failing to give effect to its
plain meaning because they themselves consider that the consequences of doing
so would be inexpedient, or even unjust or immoral.

The words of a statute are first understood in their natural, ordinary or
popular sense and phrases and sentences are construed according to their
grammatical meaning unless that leads to some absurdity or unless there is
something in the context, or in the object of the statute to suggest the
contrary. If the language of the statute is not clear and there is need to
resort to aids of construction, such aids can be either internal or external.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 16 of 331 In the definition of
"royalty" in clause (v) of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) of the Income-tax
Act, 1961, the Legislature has used a comma after the word "copyright"
indicating the legislative intent to treat "copyright" independently of the
words "literary, artistic or scientific work". Therefore, "copyright" cannot
be read in conjunction with the words literary, artistic or scientific work by
substituting the comma with the word "of'. The definition of "royalty" is
inclusive. Deletion of the comma and addition of the word "of' between words
"copyright" and "literary" would limit the scope royalty only to copyright
work relating to literary, artistic or scientific work including films or
video tapes for use in connection with television or tapes for use in
connection with radio broadcasting. The term "copyright" is wide enough to
include other works such as dramatic or musical work, computer programme,
cinematograph film and a sound recording as included in clauses (a), (b), (d)
and (e) of section 14 of the Copyright Act, 1957. The language employed in
clause (v) of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) of the 1961 Act is plain,
clear and unambiguous and is not capable of two meanings. Therefore, there is
no need substitution of the comma by the word "of'.

The expression "copyrighted article" is not defined either in the 1961 Act or
in th, 7-. Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between India and the U.S.A.
(DTAA). Nor there a definition in the Copyright Act, 1957 of "copy-righted
article" on the lines as in the Patents Act, 1970. The term "copy-righted
article" is nowhere used in the Act or the Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement. The expression "copyrighted article" finds its origin in U. S.
regulations and then in the OECD commentary. The OECD commentary or IRS
Regulations of the U. S. A. would not be a safe or acceptable guide or aid for
interpretation of provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or the Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement between India and another country. The language
used in Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) of the Act or article 12(3) of the
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement defining the term "royalty" is not
ambiguous. For the purposes of interpretation of the term "royalty" in respect
of computer software reliance cannot be placed on the difference made in the
OECD commentary or in the U. S. regulations between the expressions "the
transfer of a copyright right" and "the transfer of a copyrighted article".
The question of royalty in respect of computer software has to be decided on
the basis of provisions of the Act and the Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement. Hence for the purposes of income-tax a copyrighted article cannot
be treated as product.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 17 of 331 CIT v. P. V. A. L.
Kulandagan Chettiar [2004] 267 ITR 654 (SC) applied. A computer programme is a
literary work under the Copyright Act, 1957 and the consideration received
will be in the nature of royalty if it is in respect of the transfer of all or
any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect thereof under
clause (v) of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) of the 1961 Act. The
definition of royalty in Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) and article 12(3)
of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement takes into its ambit both
industrial as well as copyright royalties. It will not be appropriate to
restrict the scope of the definition of royalty under the income-tax law only
on the ground that since computer programme has been provided protection under
the Copyright Act, the provisions of other intellectual property rights laws
will not be applicable.

A computer programme is a process when it executes instructions lying in it in
passive state. Therefore, any consideration made for the use of process would
amount to royalty. Explanation 2 has to be read as part and parcel of section
9(1)(vi) of the Act. Keshavji Ravji and Co. v. CIT [1990] 183 ITR 1 (SC)
applied.

The second proviso to section 9(1)(vi) carves out an exception from the main
section exempting lump sum payment made by a resident for the transfer of all
or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer
software supplied by a non-resident manufacturer along with a computer or
computer-based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on
Computer Software Export, Software Export, Software Development and Training,
1986 of the Government of India. It cannot stand on its own and hence cannot
be held a substantive provision. Therefore, section 9(1)(vi) from the very
inception included computer software for the purposes of royalty. If royalty
income from the use or the right to use or transfer of all or any right
(including the granting of the licence) in respect of copyright in computer
programme was not taxable under section 9(1)(vi) of the Act, Parliament would
not have prescribed a special rate of income-tax in respect of royalty income
in respect of any computer software under section 115A(1A). The provisions of
section 9(1)(vi) have to be considered in the light of the provisions of
section 115A(1A) of the Act. The use of the expressions "in respect of
copyright in any book to an Indian concern" or "in respect of any computer
software to a person resident in India" in section 115A(1A) shows that for the
purposes of income-tax copyright in "computer software" is IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 18 of 331 different from copyright in any
"book" though both are literary works under the Copyright Act, 1957\.

The Income-tax Act and the Copyright Act operate in different fields. The
object of the Copyright Act is to provide protection to the copyrights in
various works of the authors whereas the purpose of income-tax is levy and
collect tax on various types of incomes. The provisions of the Income- tax Act
cannot be explained by resorting to various provisions of the Copyright Act,
1957. However, a limited reference to understand the meaning of term
"copyright" can be made to the Copyright Act, 1957 as this term has not been
defined under the 1961 Act.

Under the Explanation inserted in section 9(1)(vi) of the 1961 Act with effect
from June 1, 1976 by the Finance Act, 2007 and again substituted by the
Finance Act, 2010 the income of a non- resident shall be deemed to accrue or
arise in India under clause (v) or clause (vi) or clause

(vii) irrespective of whether the non-resident has a residence or a place of
business or business connection in India or the non-resident has rendered
services in India. Therefore, once the consideration is received by a non-
resident for the transfer or all or any rights including the granting of a
licence in respect of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or
process or similar property or any copy-right literary, artistic or scientific
work, the consideration received shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India
and will be taxable in India. Hence, by virtue of the amended Explanation to
section 9(1)(vi) royalty income will be taxable in India whether or not the
non- resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in
India. The effect of an Agreement made pursuant to section 90 of the 1961 Act
is that if no tax liability is imposed under this Act, the question of
resorting to the Agreement would not arise. No provision of the Agreement can
fasten a tax liability when the liability is not imposed by this Act. If a tax
liability is imposed by this Act, the Agreement may be resorted to for
negativing or reducing it. In case of difference between the provisions of the
Act and of an Agreement under section 90, the provisions of the Agreement
shall prevail over the provisions of the Act and can be enforced by an
appellate authority or the court. However, as provided by sub-section (2) the
provisions of this Act will apply to the assessee in the event they are
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 19 of 331 more beneficial to
him. Where there is no specific provision in the Agreement, it is the basic
law, i. e., the Income-tax Act which will govern the taxation of income.

The definitions of term "royalty" in Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) of the
1961 Act and paragraph (3) of article 12 of the Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement are identical. According to paragraph (7)(a) royalties shall be
deemed to arise in a Contracting State when the payer is that State itself, a
political sub-division, a local authority, or a resident of that State. If the
person paying royalty has a permanent establishment or a fixed base there in
connection with which the liability to pay the royalties is incurred and the
liability is borne by such establishment or base the royalty is deemed to
arise in the State in which the permanent establishment or fixed base is
situated. According to paragraph (7)(b) royalties related to the use of, or
the right to use, the right or property, in one of the Contracting States,
shall be deemed to arise in that Contracting State. No conflict exists between
the Income-tax Act and the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement.

The language of article 12(7)(b) of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement
between India and the United States of America is clear and unambiguous. The
royalties or fees for included services shall be deemed to arise in that
Contracting State in which the use of, or the right to use, the right or
property, or the fees for included services is performed. The term "right" in
article 12(7)(b) cannot be interpreted to mean "copyright" as used in the
article 12(3)(a).

The Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement with the United States of America was
entered on December 20, 1990. By an amendment to section 9(1) by insertion of
Explanation with effect from June 1, 1976 the royalties will be deemed to
accrue or arise in India whether or not the non-resident has a residence or
place of business or business connection in India. Therefore, by this
amendment the income by way of royalty will be deemed to accrue or arise
irrespective of a contrary provision in the Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement."

11\. In this backdrop, the issues raised are considered individually :-

Distribution fee payable under the agreement is a relation to use or right to
use Intellectual property, knowhow, trademark & other brand features :

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 20 of 331 11.1. As is evident
> from the extracts reproduced from the assessment order earlier, the AO on
> examination of agreements came to the conclusion that the Google Ireland
> holds the intellectual property, knowhow, trademark and other brand features
> with respect to products and services offered by the Adwords_program. And
> vide the distribution agreement, the assessee company has been granted
> rights to market and distribute Adwords program in India In this process,
> Google Ireland has permitted the assessee company to access all intellectual
> property and confidential information which is utilized by the 1TES division
> of the assessee. He also observed that the job of the assessee does not end
> with marking and distribution of Adword program but also has to support
> existing customers by providing customer services to the advertisers in
> consonance with standards maintained by Google. It is also required to
> process customer queries related to advertisement issues and escalate the
> same to Google Ireland. The AO has also noted that before the advertiser ca-
> run his campaign, the same has to be cleared as per editorial and trademark
> guidelines, hence the assessee had to monitor advertiser activity and gather
> other information about advertisers as specified. The distribution agreement
> cannot be read without the service agreement and on combined reading, it is
> clear that the assessee company has been granted the right to use valuable
> business assets of Google Ireland which includes intellectual property in
> the products and services offered by Google Ireland.

Therefore, the distribution rights granted are itself IP rights covered by
"similar property used in section 9(1)(vi) of the Act". Thereafter, he
concluded since IP of Google resides in search engine technology, associated
software and other features, logically the income received by it includes
royalty for its IP from all its non-retail users viz., Advertisers and
Intermediaries. Therefore, the assessee company being the intermediary has
obtained the right to use the intellectualproperty, knowhow, trademark and
other brand features owned by Google lreland.

11.2. The AO after examining Clause-1.5 & Clause-6 of the distribution
agreement concluded that the assessee company was permitted to use the
trademarks of Google for the purposes of marketing and distribution of Adwords
program. Afterexamining Clause-3 of the agreement, he opined that Google
Ireland is obliged toprovide advertising space through itsdistributor i.e. the
assessee company and is also obliged to train the distributor, so that it can
market and distribute the Adwords program. The Adwords platform runs on
servers located outside India and the assessee IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 21 of 331 company cannot perform its activities
of marketing and distribution without training which amounts to transfer of
knowhow. The training relates to internal tools and is provided to the staff
of the assessee company only. Thus, he was of the view that technical knowhow
was imparted to the assessee company for the purpose of marketing, sale of the
Adword program as also maintenance of Adword accounts,after sales, service,
billing, etc. Hence, the sums remitted to Royalty within the meaning of the
Act. I have examined the facts and circumstances of the case.

11.3. The relevant provisions of the Act to be examined are as under :-

> "In Sec.9(1)(vi) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the term 'royalty' has been
> defined under Explanation 2 to mean "consideration (including lumpsum
> consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the income of
> the recipient chargeable under the head 'capital gains) for

> (i) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence)
> in respect of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process
> or trade mark or similar property;

> (ii) the imparting of any information concerning the working of or the use
> of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade
> mark or similar property;

> (iii) the use of any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or
> process or trade mark or similar property;

> (iv) the imparting of any information concerning technical, industrial,
> commercial or scientific knowledge, experience or skill ;

> (iva) the use or right to use any industrial, commercial or scientific
> equipment but not including the amounts referred to in section 44Bal

> (v) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence)
> in respect of any copyright, literary, artistic or scientific work including
> films or video tapes for use in connection with television or tapes for use
> in connection with radio broadcasting, but not including consideration for
> the sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic films; or
> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 22 of 331

> (vi) the rendering of any services in connection with the activities
> referred to in sub-clauses

> (i) to [(iv), (iva) and] (v).

> Explanation 3.---For the purposes of this clause, "computer software" means
> any computer programme recorded on any disc, tape, perforated media or other
> information storage device and includes any such programme or any customized
> electronic data;

> Explanation 4.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
> transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property or
> information includes and has always included transfer of all or any right
> for use or right to use a computer software (including granting of a
> licence) irrespective of the medium throuct which such right is transferred.

> Explanation 5.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
> royalty includes and has always included consideration in respect of any
> right, property or information, whether or not--

> (a) the possession or control of such right, property or information is with
> thepayer;

(b)such right, property or information is used directly by the payer;

(c) the location of such right, property or information is in India.

11.4. Intellectual property and trademark can be defined as under :-

> "Intellectual property (p) is a legal concept which refers to creations of
> the mind for which exclusive rights are recognized. [1] Under intellectual
> property law, owners are granted certain exclusive rights to a variety of
> intangible assets, such as musical, literary, and artistic works;
> discoveries and inventions; and words, phrases, symbols, and designs. Common
> types of intellectual property rights include copyright,
> trademarks,patents,industrial design rights,trade dress, and in some
> jurisdictions trade secrets.

> A trademark, trade mark, or trade-mark[1] is a recognizable sign,design or
> expression which [2][3][4][5] identifies products or services of a
> particular source from those of others. The trademark owner can be an
> individual, business organization, or any legal entity. A IT(IT)ANos.1190,
> 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013,
> 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
> IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 23 of 331 trademark may be located on a
> package, a label, a voucher or on the product itself. For the sake of
> corporate identity trademarks are also being displayed on company
> buildings."

11.5. As per the service agreement Google Ireland shares the Confidential
information which is defined to be:

> "Confidential Information" shall mean all data and information of a
> confidential ;;Mature, including know-holy and trade secrets, relating to
> the business, the affairs, the products, the development projects or other
> products or services of Google Ireland or its suppliers or its affiliate,
> including but not limited to intellectual Property.

11.6. Google Ireland as per the service agreement shares Confidential
information in the following manner:

> CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.

> Access and Use of Confidential Information. During the course of performance
> of this Agreement; Google Ireland will disclose certain Confidential
> Information to Google India solely to permit Google India to perform its
> obligations under this Agreement. Except as otherwise provided in this
> Agreement, Google India agrees that such Confidential Information shall be
> kept secret by Google India during the term of this Agreement and after the
> expiration hereof Google India shall retrain from using or exploiting any
> and all Confidential Information for any purposes or activities other than
> those contemplated in this Agreement.

11.7. After considering the express terms in the service agreement, the
finding of the AO with regard to right to use intellectual property as well as
trademark is confirmed. The issue with respect to transfer of technical
knowhow will be dealt later under the head "imparting of information".

Use or right to use the process in Adwords program was granted by Google
Ireland & That the fee payable is for granting of a licence in respect of a
copy right in the Adwords program :- These two issues are taken together as
they are interrelated. I have studied he Adwords program in detail and it is
very clear to my mind that the Adwords program owned and developed by Google
Ireland is a Computer Program within the meaning of Explanations -- 3, 4 & 5
to section 9(1)(vi) of the Act. As per the Delhi Bench of the Hon'ble Tribunal
(supra) the following principles emerge:- A computer programme is a process
when it executes instructions I in it in passive state. Therefore, any
consideration made for the use of process would amount to royalty. The term
"copyright" is wide enough to include other works such as dramatic or musical
work, computer programme, The question of royalty in respect of computer
software has to he decided on the basis of provisions of the Act and the
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement. Hence for the purposes of income-tax a
copyrighted article cannot be treated as product. CIT v. P. V. A. L.
Kulandagan Chettiar [2004] 267 ITR 654 (SC) applied.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 24 of 331 A computer programme
is a literary work under the Copyright Act, 1957 and the consideration
received will be in the nature of royalty if it is in respect of the transfer
of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect thereof
under clause (v) of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) of the 1961 Act. The
definition of royalty in Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) and article 12(3)
of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement takes into its ambit both
industrial as well as copyright royalties. It will not be appropriate to
restrict the scope of the definition, of royalty under the income-tax law only
on the ground that since computer programme has been provided protection under
the Copyright Act, the provisions of other intellectual property rights laws
will not be applicable. Therefore, section 9(1)(vi) from the very inception
included computer software for the purposes of royalty. If royalty income from
the use or the right to use or transfer of all or any right (including the
granting of the licence) in respect of copyright in computer programme was not
taxable under section 9(1)(vi) of the Act, Parliament would not have
prescribed a special rate of income-tax in respect of royalty income in espect
of any computer software under section 115A(1A). The provisions of section
9(1)(vi) have to be considered in the light of the provisions of section
115A(1A) of the Act. The use of the expressions "in respect of copyright in
any book to an Indian concern" or "in respect of any computer software to a
person resident in India" in section 115A(1 A) shows that for the purposes of
krIcome-tax copyright "computer software" is different from copyright in any
"book" though both are literary works under the Copyright Act, 1957.
Therefore, once the consideration is received by a non-resident for the
transfer or all or any rights including the granting of a licence in respect
of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or similar
property or any copy-right literary, artistic or scientific work, the
consideration received shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India and will be
taxable in India. Hence, by virtue of the amended Explanation to section
9(1)(vi) royalty income will be taxable in India whether or not the non-
resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India.

11.9. The Jurisdictional High Court in CIT Vs. Samsung Electronics (345 ITR
494) (Kar) had occasion to examine the term "royalty" vis-à-vis "computer
software". The Hon'ble Court observed:-

> "In view of the abovesaid definition of "royalty", it is clear that the
> necessary ingredient to be satisfied to find out as to whether the payment
> would amount to "royalty" is as follows - payment of any kind received as a
> consideration for the use of, or the right to use, any copyright of
> literary, artistic or scientific work. It has been universally accepted that
> a literary work is entitled to copyright and wherefore, a literary work is
> entitled to be registered as copyright. In India, the provisions of section
> 2(o) of the Copyright Act, 1957, defines "literary work" as under:

"'literary work' includes computer programmes, tables and compilations
including computer databases"

Therefore, "computer software" has been recognized as copyright work is also.
Having regard to the above said definition of "royalty", we have to consider•
the contents of software licence agreement entered into by the nonresident
with Samsung Electronics and also the respondents IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 25 of 331 in the case represented by Sri
Ganesh, learned senior counsel and Sri Aravind Dattar, wherein it is a case of
purchase, sale or distribution or otherwise of the off-the-shelf software. It
is described as a "software licence agreement", wherein it is averred that
customer accepts an individual, non- transferable and non-exclusive licence to
use the licenced software program(s) on the terms and conditions enumerated in
the agreement. It is further averred that the customer-Samsung Electronics-
shall protect confidential information and shall not remove any copyright,
confidentiality or other• proprietary rights provided by the nonresident.
However, what is granted under the said licence is only a licence to use the
software for internal business without having any right for making any
alteration or reverse engineering or creating sub-licences. What is.
transferred under the said licence is the licence to use the software and the
copyright continue to be Jvith the non-resident as per the agreement. Even as
per the agreement entered into with the other distributors as also the end-
user licence agreement, it is clear that the distributor would get exclufive
non-transferable licence within the territory for• which he is appointed and
he has got right to distribute via resellers the software, upon payment of the
licences set forth in exhibit A to the agreement only to end users pursuant to
a valid Actuate shrinkwrap or other actuate licence agreement and except as
expressly set forth in the said agreement, distributor may not rent, lease,
loan, sell or• otherwise distribute the software the documentation or any
derivative works based upon the software or documentation in whole or in part.
Distributor shall not reverse engineer, decompile, or otherwise attempt to
derive or modem the source code for the software. The distributor shall have
no rights to the software other than the rights expressly set forth in the
agreement. The distributor shall not mods or• copy any part of the software or
documentation. The distributor may not use subdistributors for firther
distribution of the software and documentation without the prior consent of
Actuate. What is charged is the licence fee to be paid by the distributor of
the software as enumerated in exhibit A to the agreement. Further, clause 6.01
of the agreement dealing with title states that the distributor acknowledges
that actuate and its suppliers retain all right, title and interest in and to
the original, and any copies (by whomever produced), of the software or
documentation and ownership of all patent copyright, trade mark, trade secret
and other intellectual property rights pertaining thereto, shall be and remain
the sole property of Actuate. The distributor shall not be an owner of any
copies of, or any interest in, the software, but rather is licenced pursuant
to the agreement to use and distribute such copies. Actuate represents that it
has the right to enter into the agreement and grant the licences provided
therein and confidentiality is protected. Therefore, on reading the contents
of the respective agreement entered into by the respondents with the non-
resident, it is clear that under the agreement, what is transferred is only a
licence to use the copyright belonging to the non-resident subject to the
terms and conditions of the agreement, as referred to above, and the
nonresident supplier continues to be the owner of the copyright and all other
intellectual property rights. It is well settled that copyright is a negative
right. It is an umbrella of many rights and licence is granted for making use
of the copyright in respect of shrink wrapped software/off-the-shelf software
under the respective agreement, which authorizes the end user, i.e., the
customer to make use of the copyright software contained in the said software,
which is purchased off the shelf or imported as shrink wrapped software and
the same would amount to transfer of part of the copyright and transfer of
right to use the copyright for internal business as per the terms and
conditions of the agreement. Therefore, the contention of the learned senior
counsel appearing for the respondents that there is no transfer of copyright
or any part thereof under the agreements entered into by the respondent with
the nonresident supplier of software cannot be accepted ............

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 26 of 331 It is well settled
that in the absence of any definition of "copyright" in the Income-tax Act or
the DTAA with the respective countries, in view of article 3 of the DTAA,
reference is to be made to the respective law regarding the definition of
"copyright", namely, Copyright Act, 1957, in India, wherein it is clearly
stated that "literary work" includes computer programmes, tables and
compilations including computer (databases). Section 16 of the Copyright Act,
1957, states that no personshall be entitled to copyright or any similar right
in any work, whether published or unpublished, otherwise than under and in
accordance with the provisions of the said Act or of any other law for the
time being in force, but nothing in this section shall be construed as
abrogating any right or jurisdiction to restrain a breach of trust or
confidence. Section 14 of the said Act dealing with the, meaning of
"copyright" reads as follows :

> "14. Meaning of copyright.-For the purposes of this Act, 'copyright' means
> the exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or
> authorise the doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any
> substantial part thereof, namely : (a) in the case of a literary, dramatic
> or musical work not being a computer programme, (i) to reproduce the work in
> any material form including the storing of it in any medium by electronic
> means ;

> (ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
> circulation ;

> (iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public ;

> (iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the
> work ;

> (v) to make any translation of the work ;

> (vi) to make any adaptation of the work ;

> (vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any
> of the acts specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (vi) ;

> (b) in the case of a computer programme, (i) to do any of the acts specified
> in clause (a);

> (ii) to sell or give on commercial rental oil offer for sale or for
> commercial rental any copy of the computer programme :

> ...........Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of
> computer programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object
> of the rental.

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 27 of 331

> (c) in the case of an artistic work, (0 to reproduce the work in any
> material form including depiction in three dimensions of a two-dimensional
> work or in two dimensions of a three- dimensional work ;

(ii) to communicate the work to the public ;

(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation ;

(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;

(v) to make any adaptation of the work ;

(vi) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of the acts specified
in relation *to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (iv) ;

(d) in the case of a cinematograph film, (i) to make a copy of the film,
including a photograph of any image forming part thereof ;

(ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film,
regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier
occasions ;

(iii) to communicate the .film to the public ;

(e) in the case of a sound recording, (i) to make any other sound recording
embodying it;

(ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the sound
recording regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on
earlier occasions ;

(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.

Explanation. -For the purposes of this section, a copy which has been sold
once shall be deemed to be a copy already in circulation.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 28 of 331 "It may also be noted
that under section 51 of the Act dealing with "When copyright -- infringed"
states that copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed-when any
person, without a licence granted by the owner of the copyright or the
RegisrrCopyrights under the Act or in contravention of the conditions of a
licence so green or of any condition imposed by a competent authority under
the Act does anytL the exclusive right to do which is by the Act conferred
upon the owner of the copyright. Section 52 of the Act dealing with certain
acts not to be infringement of copyright states that the following acts shall
not constitute an infringement of copyright, namely :

"52.(I)(aa) the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the
lawfill possessor of a copy of such computer programme, Irvin such copy (i) in
order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it was
supplied ; or

(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied."

It is clear from the abovesaid provisions of the Copyright Act that the right
to copyright work would also constitute exclusive right of the copyright
holder and any violation of the said right would amount to infringement under
section 51 of the Act. However, if such copying of computer programme is done
by a lawfid possessor of a copy of such computer programme, the same would not
constitute infringement of copyright and wherefore, but for the licence
granted in these cases to the respondent to make copy of the software
contained in shrink- wrapped/off-the-shelf software into the hard disk of the
designated computer and to take a copy for back-up purposes, the end user has
no other right and the said taking back-up would have constituted an
infringement, but for the licence. Therefore, licence is granted for taking
copy of the software and to store it in the hard disk and to take a back-up
copy and right to make a copy itself is a part of the copyright. Therefore,
when licence to make use of the software by making copy of the same and to
store it in the hard disk of the designated computer and to take back-up copy
of the software, it is clear. that what is transferred is right to use the
software, an exclusive right, which the owner of the copyright, i.e., the
respondent-supplier owns and what is transferred is only right to use copy of
the software for the internal business as per the terms and conditions of the
agreement. The decision of the Delhi High Court in CIT v. Dynamic Vertical
Software India P. Ltd. [2011] 332 ITR 222 (Delhi) relied upon by Sri Aravind
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 29 of 331 Dattar, learned senior
counsel appearing for the respondents in some of the cases in support of his
contention that by no stretch of imagination, payment made by the respondents
to the non- resident suppliers can be treated as "royalty" is not helpful to
the respondents in the present cases as in the said case, the Delhi High Court
was considering the provisions of section 40(a)(0 of the Act and the order of
the High Court reads as follows (page 223) :

"What is found, as a matter of fact, is that the assessee has been purchasing
the software from Microsoft and sold it further in Indian market by no stretch
of imagination, it would be termed as royalty."

Therefore, the contention of the learned senior counsel appearing for the
respondents that there is no transfer of any part of copyright or copyright
under the impugned agreements or licences cannot be accepted. Accordingly, we
hold that right to make a copy of the software and use it for internal
business by making copy of the same and storing the same in the hard disk of
the designated computer and taking back up copy would itself amount to
copyright work under section 14(1) of the Act and licence is granted to use
the software by making copies, which work, but for the licence granted would
have constituted infringement of copyright and the licencee is in possession
of the legal copy of the software under the licence. Therefore, the contention
of the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents that there is no
transfer of any part of copyright or copyright and transaction only involves
sale of copy of the copyright software cannot be accepted It is also to be
noted that what is supplied is the copy of the software of which the
respondent-supplier continues to be the owner of the copyright and what is
granted under the licence is only right to copy the software as per the terms
of the agreement, which, but for the licence would amount to infringement of
copyright and in view of the licence granted the same would not amount to
infringement under section 52 of the Copyright Act as referred to above.
Therefore, the amount paid to the non-resident supplier towards supply of
shrink-wrapped software, or oche shelf software is not the price of the C. D.
alone nor software alone nor the price of licence granted. This is a
combination of all and in substance, unless licence is granted permitting the
end user to copy and download the software, the dumb C. D. containing the
software would not in any way be helpful to the end user as software would
become operative only if it is downloaded to the hardware of the designated
computer as per the terms and conditions of the agreement and that makes the
difference between the computer software and copyright in respect of books or
prerecorded music software as book and prerecorded music C D. can be used once
they are purchased, but so far as software stored in dumb C D. is concerned,
the transfer of dumb C D. by itself would not confer any right upon the end
user and the purpose of the C. D. is only to enable the end user to take a
copy of the software and to store it in the hard disk of the designated
computer if licence is granted in that behalf and in the absence of licence,
the same would amount to infringement of copyright, which is exclusively owned
by non- resident suppliers, who would continue to be the proprietor of
copyright. Therefore, there is no similarity between the transaction of
purchase of the book or prerecorded music C. D. or the C. D. containing
software and in view of the same, the Legislature in its wisdom, has treated
the literary work like books and other articles separately from "computer"
software within the meaning of the "copyright" as referred to above under
section 14 of the Copyright Act.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 30 of 331 It is also clear from
the abovesaid analysis of the DTAA, the Income-tax Act, the Copyright Act that
the payment would constitute "royalty" within the meaning of article 12(3) of
the DTAA and even as per the provisions of section 9(1)(vi) of the Act as the
definition of "royalty" under clause 9(1)(vi) of the Act is broader than the
definition of "royalty" under the DTAA as the right that is transferred in the
present case is the transfer of copyright; including the right to Make copy of
software for internal business, and payment made in that regard would
constitute "royalty" for imparting of any information concerning technical,
industrial, commercial or scientific knowledge, experience or skill as per
clause (iv) of Explanation 2 to section - 9(1)(vi) of the Act. In any view of
the matter, in view of the provisions of section 90 of the Act, agreements
with foreign countries DTAA would override the provisions of the Act. Once it
is held that payment made by the respondents to the non-resident companies
would amount to "royalty" within the meaning of article 12 of the DTAA with
the respective country, it is clear that the payment made by the respondents
to the non-resident supplier would amount to royalty. In view of the said
finding, it is clear that there is obligation on the part of the respondents
to deduct tax at source under section 195 of the Act and consequences would
follow as held by the hon'ble Supreme Court while remanding these appeals to
this court. Accordingly, we answer the substantial question of law in favour
of the Revenue and against the assessee by holding that on the facts and in
the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was not
justified in holding that the amount(s) paid by the respondent(s) to the
foreign software suppliers was not "royalty" and that the same did not give
rise to any "income" taxable in India and wherefore, the respondent(s) were
not liable to deduct any tax at source and pass the following order:"

11.10. The Delhi Bench of the Hon'ble Tribunal in Assistant Commissioner of
Income-tax v. Amadeus India P. Ltd. (257 ITR 23) (AT) had occasion to examine
the term "Computer Software" & "Computer Program" and defined the terms --

"Computer software" means "a computer programme recorded on any disc, etc.,
and includes any such programme which was transmitted from India to a place
outside India by any means" ... .......

............. But once the scope of the words computer programme was not
explained in section 801111E, the global meaning of the word is to be taken
into account. The doctrine of pari materia was relevant for this purpose.
According to that doctrine, the meaning of a particular word could be imported
if the same was not contrary to the provisions of the Act to which it is being
imported. Therefore, in the absence of a specific definition of the word
"programme" in the Income-tax Act, the expression "computer programme" should
be understood as defined in the Copyright Act and should be interpreted
broadly, liberally and consistently with other legislations of Government to
include export of "data processing software" as well IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 31 of 331 .........The words "computer
programme" has not been defined in the Income-tax Act but it has been defined
in the Copyright Act, 1957, as amended in 1994. According to the definition,
it means a set of instructions expressed in words, codes, schemes orany other
forms including a machine readable medium capable of causing a compiler to
perform a particular task or achieve a particular result."

11.11. In Millennium IT Software Ltd., In re (338 ITR 391) (AAR), the Authoth
ruled on the facts of the case that :-

"The applicant entered into a software licence and maintenance agreement
(agreement) with Indian Commodity and Exchange Limited (ICEL) on March 27,
2009. Under the agreement the applicant allowed ICEL to use the software
product (the licenced programme) owned by it. The' licenced programme was to
be installed into the computer machines designated by ICEL. The applicant was
to deploy its' personnel to the designated site to train the employees of
ICEL. The applicant was required to provide at its own cost, maintenance and
support services. For installation and implementation of the licenced
programme, the applicant was to be paid Rs. 4 crore. The software became live
on August 20, 2009. The licence to use the licenced programme was for four
years and thereafter its renewal was left to the discretion of ICEL. The
agreement provided for payment of licensing and maintenance fee from January
1, 2010 till December 31, 2014\. The mode of the payment was a fixed amount of
Rs. 50 lakhs per quarter plus an additional fee based on the utilization of
the licenced programme by ICEL, so that the total amount payable would not
exceed Rs. 150 lakhs per quarter. The licenced programme was developed by the
applicant at its development centre in Sri Lanka. The rights granted' under
the agreement were non-excluSive, non-transferable, non-assignable,
indivisible. The applicant had granted 'GEL the right to make copies of the
licenced programme to be installed on equipment only at designated sites of
ICEL. Each copy was to carry copyright, trade mark and other notices relating
to proprietary rights of the applicant. ICEL could not sell, distribute or
disclose the licenced programme or associated documents to any third party.,
Use of the source code and reverse engineering of the licenced programme was
strictly prohibited. On these facts the applicant sought an advance ruling on
the questions whether the applicant was not taxable in India under the
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 32 of 331 Income-tax Act, 1961,
with respect to implementation and licence and maintenance fees paid by ICEL
to it under the agreement ; whether the applicant was not taxable under the
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between India and Sri Lanka (DTAA) ;
whether the applicant providing maintenance service to ICEL could not be
treated as having a permanent establishment in India ; whether, if the
applicant was not taxable in India for the fees paid by 10EL, it would later
be required to withhold tax under section 195 of the Act on the fees, and if
ICEL had deducted withholding tax, the applicant would be entitled to get
refund ; and assuming that the applicant had no other taxable income in India,
whether the applicant would be absolved from filing a tax return in India
under the provisions of the Act with respect to the fees.

The Authority on the stated facts ruled :

(i) That the fees paid by ICE'', to the applicant were taxable as royalty
under clause (v) of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)6,0 of the Act.

(ii) That since the fees payable by ICEL to the applicant arose in India, they
were taxable under article 12(2) of the DTAA in India.

(iii) That the applicant did not have a permanent establishment in terms of
article 5 of the DTAA.

(iv) That the provision of withholding tax under section 195 would apply.

(v) That as the applicant was liable to tax in India, it was required to .file
a return of income under the provisions of the Act.

Per V. K Shridhar (Member).-(i) Under Indian copyright law, computer
programmes are considered to be literary works and accordingly entitled to
copyright protection under section 14 of the Copyright Act, 1957. The
definition of computer programme has been worded in liberal language. It
defines computer programme as a set of instructions expressed in words, codes,
schemes or in any other form. The use of this language signifies the
legislative intent to award copyright protection to both the source code and
the object code of the computer programme. During the process of registration
of a copyright in ti computer programme, the author also files the object code
of the software with the Registrar of Copyrights. Thus authorship of both the
source code and the object code are protected by the Copyright Act as literary
work.

(ii) Section 52 of the Copyright Act specifies the acts which do not
constitute infringement of copyright. Section 52(aa) uses the term "lawfill
possessor". It thus, carves out an exception for lawful possessors of a
computer programme as far as copies or adaptation for personal use is
concerned. The purchase of software from a reseller is payment for use of
intellectual property and not for the purchase of goods, unless the payment
falls under the exception provided by the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 33 of 331 second proviso to sec 9(1)(vi) of the 1961
Act. What had been licenced squarely fell within the definition of computer
programme under section 2(ffc) of the Copyright Act and was copyrightable
subject mailer.

(iii) The scope of the agreement extended beyond installation and
implementation 07 -the licenced programme. The maintenance service in respect
of the licenced programme was an integral part of agreement. In bifurcating
the payments before and after installation and implementation, the nature of
the payments remained royally for the use of the licenced programme and would
not change from royalty to business income. If it was to be in the nature of
business income the agree/hent would have been for sale and service of
licenced programme and the fee paid would have been taxable as business income
under article 7 of the DTAA, depending on whether or not the applicant had a
permanent establishment in India under article 5 of the DTAA.

(iv) Therefore since without the agreement being in place, any usage of the
computer programme by the customers would have amounted to copyright
infringement, the payment made under the agreement was for Obtaining the right
to use the'copyright lit the software and was taxable as royalty under the
DTAA and the 1961 Act.

Per P. K. Balasubramanyan (Chairman).-(0 In terms of the InCome-tax Act, 1961
royalty means consideration for the transfer of all or any right, including
the granting of a licence, in respect of any copyright or literary work. What
the applicant had granted to ICIEL, was a licence to use the computer
programme developed by it and owned by it and over which it had a copyright.
This was done fora- consideration. This was a licence recognized by the
Copyright Act and was 'a known mode of exploitation of a copyright. The
applicant had not parted with its title over the copyright in the software. It
had conveyed to another a right to use the software over which it had a
copyright. The right of user of software, thus given, involved the right to
use the copyright. The user of a software created, over which a copyright is
acquired cannot be divorced from the use of the copyright itself. The right
granted for use of a copyrighted article for a consideration, would also be
royalty. It was, therefore, not possible to accept the argument that what was
involved was the mere permitting of the right to use a copyrighted article.
Indian law does not diStinguish between copyrighted article and the copyright.
What is needed to attract liability is the farming out of the right to use or
of the right itself for consideration.

(ii) The definition of royalty contained in article 12(3) of the DTAA between
India and Sri Lanka shows that it is a payment of any kind received as
consideration for the "use of or the right to any copyright". The definition
in the DTAA is wider than the one found in the Act. For, it takes in even the
consideration received for permitting another to use a copyright.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 34 of 331 Even a right to use
need not be conferred. It is not necessary even to grant the right to use the
copyright if one were to look at it literally, though the grant of a right to
use could be said to be included in the grant of a right in the copyright. In
the present case, not merely the use was licenced but the licencee was given
the right to copy it and use it wherever it needed it for its business. The
right given to ICEL for a consideration to copy the copyrighted software and
use it for its own purposes whenever and wherever needed by it, clearly
attracted the definition of royalty to the consideration paid by ICEL to the
applicant, though the right granted may be limited and did not take in a right
to further transfer the right or its use.

Dassault Systems K K, In re [2010.1 322 ITR 125 (AAR) commented upon."

11.12. In Citrix Systems Asia Pacific Pty. Limited, In re (343 ITR 01)(AAR),
the Authority ruled on the facts of the case that :-

"When a software is created by a person who acquires a copyright for it, he
becomes the owner of that copyright. He can transfer or licence that right
either by himself or through an agent. When he sells or licences the software
for use, he also sells or licences the right to use the copyright embedded
therein. If a software is used without being lawfully acquired either by
purchase or by licence, that would amount to an infringement of the copyright
because of the copyright embedded in the software. The software is a literary
work and the copyright of the creator over the software is an important and
commercially valuable right. So, whenever a software is assigned or licenced
for use, there is involved an assignment of the right to use the embedded
copyright in the software or a licence to use the embedded copyright, the
intellectual property right in the software. It is not possible to divorce the
software from the intellectual property right of the creator of the software
embedded therein. Even the right to sell or give on rental, would amount to a
copyright and would be a right to be dealt with as a copyright.

The definition of "royalty" in the Income-tax Act, 1961 is, consideration for
transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect
of a pater: innovation, model, design, secret IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 35 of 331 formula or process or trade mark or similar
property. Consideration for grant of the use of any of the above is also
royalty. It also takes in the consideration for the transfer of all or any
rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of any copyright,
literary, artistic or scientific work Licence is not confined to an exclusive
licence. When a software, over which a copyright is acquired and thus owned,
is licenced for use to another or sold to another for his own use, the
licencee or the purchaser gets the right to use the software without being
held guilty of infringement of the copyright. When the use of software,
without anything more, would render the user liable for infringement of the
copyright embedded in the software, the sale or the licensing of the software
involves the grant of a right to use the copyright in the software and right
to use the intellectual property embedded in the software. 'Therefore, the
licensing of a softwaresfbr use by the end-use customer, is not the mere sale
of a copyrighted article.

The words within brackets, "including the granting of a licence" indicate an
expansive' definition. The word "includes" is an inclusive definition and
expands the meaning. Therefore, licence cannot be restricted to transfer of a
right dealt with earlier by the provision and should be understood as taking
in the grant of a licence simpliciter.

Article 12 of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between India and
Australia (DTAA) defines "royalties" to mean "payment made as consideration
for the use of or the right to use any copyright, patent, design or model,
plan, secret formula or process, trade mark or other like property or right".
When the DTAA speaks of royalty, and defines it, it must be understood as it
is commonly understood. The article speaks of the use of or the right to use
any copyright. Use of a copyright takes place when the copyright is used. This
is distinct front the right to use a copyright. The two expressions are used
disjunctively and the expression used is "or". The context does not warrant
the reading of "or" as "and". If so, the consideration received sfor
permitting another to use a copyright is also royalty.

A copyrighted article is nothing but an article which incorporates the
copyright of the owner, the assignee, the exclusive licencee or the licencee.
So, when a copyrighted article is permitted or licenced IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 36 of 331 to be used for a fee, the permission
involves not only the physical or' electronic manifestation of a programme,
but also the use of or the right to use the copyright embedded therein.

That apart, article 12(3) of the DTAA defines royalties as payments, whether
periodical or not and, however, described or computed, as consideration for
"the use of, or the right to use any copyright, patent, design or model, plan,
secret formula or process, trade mark or other like property or right". The
definition is wider than that contained in the Act. It also ropes in payment
of consideration for the use of a copyright in addition to the consideration
paid for the right to use a copyright, covered by the definition in the Act.
Consideration paid for use of a copyrighted software is also payment for use
of the copyright embedded in the software. There cannot be a use of software,
over which exists a copyright, without a use of the copyright therein. The
payment for such use can only be royalty.

The sale or licensing for use of a copyrighted software amounts to the grant
of a right to use a copyright.

P. No. 30 of 1999, In re 11999) 238 JTR 296 (AAR) relied on.A ruling by the
Authority is based on the facts involved in the application leading to that
ruling. The doctrine of precedent cannot be applied to a ruling under section
245R(4) of the Act. The Act has itself made it clear that the ruling is
binding on the applicant in the application and the Revenue, in respect of
that application and the transaction involved therein.

The applicant, a company incorporated in Australia and provider of software
services, entered into agreements with Indian distributors for the
distribution and sale of its software and hardware products in India. In the
year 2006, the applicant entered into a distribution agreement with I, an
Indian company engaged in the business of distribution of computer software
and hardware, under which I was appointed non-exclusive distributor of the
pro-ducts of the applicant in India. For the software product, Citrix XenApp,
while sale and collection was made through the distributor, no physical
delivery of the product was made to the distributor. On the basis of the
demand of the customers, the distributor placed orders of purchase with the
applicant and made payments to the applicant The applicant then di transmitted
a "key" to the end-user customer who, on receipt of the key, downloaded the
software from the server of the applicant. In addition, I also facilitated :if
execution of the Citrix subscription advantage programme IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 37 of 331 between the applicant and its
existing customers. The programme was a package of support services during the
period of the programme, including product version updates, sub'scription
advantage news and updates and secure portal access. The applicant sought an
advance ruling on the taxability in India of payments made by I to it for the
software product, Citrix XenApp and the subscription advantage programme. The
questions framed by the Authority were whether the payments received by the
applicant from the distributor for sale of the software product were in the
nature of "royalty" within the meaning or the term in Explanation 2 to clause
(vi) of section 9(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, or within the meaning of the
term in article 12 of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between India
and Australia, whether the payments received by the applicant from the
distributor for the right to download/receive version updates for the software
products of the- applicant were in the nature of "royalty" within the meaning
of the term in Explanation 2 to clause (vi) of section 9(1) of the Act,
whether the payments received by the applicant from the distributor for the
Citrix subscription advantage programme were in the nature of 'fees for
technical services" within the meaning of the term in Explanation 2 to clause
(vii) of section 9(1) of the Act, whether the payment received by the
applicant from the distributor for the Citrix subscription advantage
programme, was in the nature of "royalty" within the meaning of the term in
article 12 of the DTAA and in the light of the declaration provided by.the
applicant that it did not have a permanent establishment in India in terms of
article 5 of the DTAA, whether the payment received by the applicant was
chargeable to tax in India and would the receipts by the applicant from the
distributor suffer withholding tax under section 195 of the Income-tax Act,
1961, and at what rate. The Authority on the stated facts, ruled :

> (i) That the payments received by the applicant from the distributor for
> sales of the software products were in the nature of royalty within the
> meaning of section 9(1)(vi) of the Income- tax Act, 1961.

(ii) That the payments concerned would be royalty as defined in article 12 of
the DTAA between India and Australia.

(iii) That the payment received by way of subscription for the updates would
also be payment received for grant of a right to use the copyright embedded in
the subscription advantage programme and it will be royalty.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 38 of 331

(iv) That it was not necessary to rule on the question whether the payment for
subscription advantage programme would be in the nature of fees for technical
services within the meaning of the Income- tax Act.

( ) That the payment received by the applicant from the distributor for the
Citrix subscription advantage programme was royalty within the meaning of
clause (a) of article 12(3) of the DTAA between India and Australia. It was
not necessary to consider the question whether it would fall under clause (g)
of article 12(3) of the DTAA.

(i) Even accepting that the applicant did not have a permanent establishment
in India, the amount was liable to be taxed in India under article 12(2) of
the DTAA.

(v) That the distributor I was required to withhold taxes in India at the time
of making payments to the applicant in terms of section 195 of the Income-tax
Act at the rate of 10 per cent. of the gross amount of royalty, as provided
under article 12(2) of -the DTAA."

11.13. In ThoughtBuzz Pvt. Ltd., In re (346 ITR 345) (AAR), the Authority
ruled on the facts of the case that :-

"The applicant, a tax resident of Singapore, was engaged in providing social
media monitoring service for a company, brand or product, through a platform
for users to hear and engage with their customers, brand ambassadors, etc.,
across the internet. The applicant charged a subscription. Clients who
subscribed could log in to its website to do a search and the system operated
by the applicant generated a report with analytics with inputs provided by the
clients. The information for generation of report was obtained from various
websites through the applicant's own computer programme for data extraction
that gathered and categorized information on the internet The applicant sought
an advance ruling on the questions whether the amount received by offering
subscription based service was taxable in India and whether tax was required
to be deducted from such amount by the subscribers who were resident in India.
The Authority on the stated facts ruled :

> That the applicant was in the business of gathering, collating and making
> available imparting information concerning industrial and commercial
> knowledge, experience and skill and consequently the payment received from
> the subscriber would be royalty in terms of clause (iv) IT(IT)ANos.1190,
> 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013,
> 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
> IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 39 of 331 of Explanation 2 to section
> 9(1)(vi) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The subscription received was royalty
> liable to be taxed as such under the Act.Under the Double Taxation Avoidance
> Agreement between India and Singapore (DMA), it would qualify as royalty
> since it was the grant of the use for consideration or right to use for
> consideration, the process Or information concerning industrial, commercial
> or scientific experience and under the D1 AA the subscription received from
> the Indian subscriber would be taxable as royalty and taxable in India in
> view of paragraph (2) of article 12 of the DTAA, subject to the bene-fit
> conferred therein on the applicant on fulfilling the condition imposed by
> that paragraph. Tax was required to be deducted in terms of section 195 of
> the Act from the payment made to it by the subscribers who were resident in
> India."

11.14. After considering these views, the facts of the instant case are that
Google Ireland has granted the assessee company the right to use the Adwords
program which is a complex computer program, without parting with the
copyright, thus granting the licence to use the software in the garb of
marketing and distribution. On exploitation of the Adwords program, revenues
are generated through advertisers and collected by the assessee company. The
assessee company in return pays the"' share of these profits in the garb of
distribution fee which is actually consideration on account of licence to use
/ right to use a computer program I process. The assessee company cannot hide
behind cryptic clauses of the distribution agreement. The argument that Google
Ireland has simply provided advertising space on its website to the assessee
company is not tenable. As discussed above, it has provided the right to use
the Adwords program which is a computer program for a consideration which
squarely falls within the meaning of Royalty as per provisions of the Act.
11.15. Ground Nos. 10 & 11 relate to the action of AO in taxing' the
distribution fee as "Royalty" under Article 12 of the tax treaty. Article 12
of the DIM between India and Ireland is reproduced as under:

> "The term "Royalties" as used in this Article means payments of any kind
> received as a consideration for the use of or the right to use, any
> copyright of literary, artistic or scientific work including cinematograph
> films or films or tapes for radio or television broadcasting,
> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 40 of 331 any patent, trade
> mark, design or model, plan, secret formula or process or for the use of or
> the right to use industrial, commercial or scientific equipment, other than
> an aircraft, or for information concerning industrial, commercial or
> scientific experience."

11.16. There is no benefit available to the assessee from the provisions of
the treaty, although treaty provisions will override the Act, as the mischief
is covered by the provisions of the treaty. It covers right to use copyright
of literary work which includes the computer program, trade mark and process.
For reasons stated above, I have held that the right to use trade mark has
been transferred as also the right to use copyrighted computer program and
process. Therefore, the action of the AO in holding that the distribution fee
is actually consideration received for the right to use / licence to use a
computer program / process viz., Adwords program, is upheld.

11.17. The assessee's representative strongly relied on two decisions of the
Mumbai Bench of the Hon'ble Tribunal viz., (i) Pinstorm Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
(ITA No. 4332/Mum/2009) & (ii) Yahoo India Pvt. Ltd. Vs. DCIT (140 TTJ 195). I
have carefully gone through both the orders. The former blindly follows its
decision in Yahoo India case. The facts of this case are that the Department
of the Tourism, Government of India, hired the services of the assessee
company to approach the foreign principal to provide uploading and display
services for hosting the banner advertisement at Yahoo Hongkong portal. The
assessee company hired the services of the principal for the same and made a
payment without deducting tax at source. The Bench observed that banner
advertisement hosting services did not involve use or right to use any
industrial, commercial or scientific equipment and no such use was actually
granted by the principal to the assessee company. Therefore, such payments did
not amount Royalty. The facts and the issues in the case are completely
different from the instant case. At no stage did the Mumbai Bench consider
what exactly is the Adword program, nor did it have occasion to examine the
right to use trade mark and other intellectual property rights. Hence, the
decision rendered in that case is peculiar to the facts of its own and is not
applicable in instant case.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 41 of 331 That the fee payable
was for imparting_ information concerning technics! industrial, commercial or
scientific knowledge and experience & That the fee payable was on account of
"right to use industrial, commercial & scientific equipment" :-

11.18. The AO held that the Adwords platform is similar to a portal running on
service and Adwords platform is based on the search engine technology of
Google. Henc4 Adword program in one way is also a commercial-scientific
equipment and without having access to servers running the Adwords platform.
Without the use of the programme, the assessee company cannot perform its
function as per distribution agreement. Hence, the distribution right also
includes the right to use industrial, commercial & scientific equipments which
are the servers.

11.19. I have already held that the Adwords program is a complex computer
program and a process within the meaning of the provisions of the Act. The
Adwords Program was developed by Google Ireland and no information concerning
the technical, industrial, commercial or scientific aspects have been found to
have been passed on to the assessee company. The assessee company simply has
the right to use the Adwords program and thereafter, is involved in collection
of advertisement revenue. It retains part of the collection on cost plus
profit basis and the balance is remitted to Google Ireland. Hence, there is no
question of any exchange of information nor was any equipment utilised by the
assessee company. It cannot be said that the assessee' company gained the
right to use any kind of industrial, scientific equipment on the facts of the
instant case. There has been the instance, that, Google Ireland has provided
training to the staff of the assessee company, but such training is restricted
to use of the Adwords program and not on how to develop the Adwords program.
This is clear from the following observations of the AO:-

Google Ireland provides training to the sales team of Google India on the
following:  Training on the AdWords program and how the AdWords program may
benefit the advertisers in India  Training on the functionality of the tools
available to optimize and follow an ad campaign on the AdWords system;

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 42 of 331  The new features/
> additions made to the AdWords program and the implications for advertisers,
> etc."

11.20. The term "Server" in context of Information Technology has been
described by "VVikipedia" as, a system (software and suitable computer
hardware) that responds to requests across a computer network to provide, or
help to provide, a network service. Therefore, a server is nothing but
computer software backed by necessary hardware. Thus, it cannot be said that
the assessee gained right to use any scientific equipment. Since, Google
Ireland has not parted with the copyright it holds, in the Adwords program, it
cannot be said that any kind of technical knowhow has been transferred to the
assessee company. Hence, without prejudice to my view in holding that the
remitted amount is Royalty on different grounds, I am not in an agreement with
the AO on these issues.

The Google Ireland rendered services to enable the assessee company to market
and distribute the Adwords program :

11.21. The AO after examining the agreement opined that training is an
inherent part of grant of distribution rights of the Adwords program. The
training is given to the staff of the assessee company at all stages of
marketing and distribution of Adwords program. The relevant extracts from the
AO's order are reproduced to highlight the nature of training :-

2.2 ..............

Distributor will distribute AdWords Program in accordance with the training
provided by Google. Failure to do so would constitute a material breach of
this Agreement and shall be grounds for termination under Section 9.3.

2.6 After-Sales Support. Distributor will provide after-sales services to
Advertisers is accordance with the broad instructions, training and standards
of Google.

EXHIBIT C Service Level Agreement IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 43 of 331 Issues that cannot immediately be resolved by Distributor based
on training and procedures provided under the Agreement must be communicated
promptly to Google by Distributor, and Google will assist Distributor in
determining the best solution.

"Customer Queries" shall mean e-mails sent from Distributor to Google related
to Advertiser issues, but excluding general communications between Distributor
and Google (e.g. billing questions, training information) and technical issues
that only Google can solve.

2.1 Further in the submission dated 15th Feb 2013 it was stated that:

> Google Ireland provides training to the sales team of Google India on the
> following:  Training on the AdWords program and how the AdWords program may
> benefit the advertisers in India  Training on the functionality of the
> tools available to optimize and follow an ad campaign on the AdWords system;

>  The new features/ additions made to the AdWords program and the
> implications for advertisers, etc."

> 11.22. From the above observations of the AO, it is very clear that the
> training has been provided with respect to the Adwords program and it
> benefits the assessee who markets and distributes the program to advertisers
> in India. Functionality of tools available on software and new features made
> to the Adwords program have also been covered in the training process. This
> clearly tantamounts to rendering of services to the assessee company.
> Therefore, the finding of the AO on this point is confirmed."

15\. Before the CIT(A), the appellant has also challenged the AO's finding
that assessee is not a beneficial owner of sum paid/payable by the GIPL. The
CIT(A) has extracted the observation of the AO on this issue and made a
reference of certain judicial pronouncements in his order and concluded that
the GIL is the beneficial owner of the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 44 of 331 sum paid/payable by the GIPL, having relied upon the
certificate of the Revenue authorities of Ireland. The relevant observations
are extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:

"9. In the instant case, the following facts are quite clear :-

(i) The Google AdWords Programme distribution agreement is between GIL & GIBL.

(ii) The assessee Distributor has made payments for acquisition of
distribution rights to GIL alone.

(iii) The assessee has filed a notarized certificate of incorporation of GIL
from the Irish Authorities to establish that the entity is incorporated in the
Company Acts of Ireland. Thereafter, the Revenue Authorities of Ireland have
certified that GIL files its corporation tax return in Ireland and is a
resident of Ireland for tax purposes and duly is liable to Irish corporation
tax on its worldwide income including that from India.

(iv) Although Circular No. 789 deals with the Indo Mauritius Treaty, the same
was applied by the Mumbai Bench to the lndo Netherland Treaty.

9.1. Now, in this light, it will be relevant to analyze the AO's attempt to
distinguish the judgement of the Hon'ble High Court of Mumbai read with the
decision of the Mumbai Bench of the Hon'ble Tribunal.

 Firstly, in the absence of agreement, it could not be ascertained whether
the Dutch. company acted or did not act as an 'agent' or 'nominee' of other
group companies or was a 'conduit' between one of the group companies and the
Indian company. Therefore, on the given facts, the Tribunal could not have
reached the legal finding which it did reach.

The AO has failed to establish that GIL was a conduit company for other group
entities. It is very clear that the amounts in question have reached the
financial statements of GIL and the same is subject to tax under Irish Revenue
Loss. Absence of agreements was not held to be crucial in the case analysed
above, The Apex Court in McDowell and Co. Ltd. v. CTO (154 ITR 148) was
clearly of the view that Tax planning may be legitimate provided it is within
the framework of the law. Colourable devices cannot be part of tax planning
and it is wrong to encourage or entertain the belief that it is
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 45 of 331 honourable to avoid
the payment of tax by dubious methods. It is the obligation of every citizen
to pay the taxes honestly without resorting to subterfuges.

There is behind taxation laws as much moral sanction as is behind any other
welfare legislation and it is a pretence to say that avoidance of taxation is
not unethical and that it stands on no less a moral plane than honest payment
of taxation. The proper way to construe a taxing statute, while considering a
device to avoid tax, is not to ask whether the provisions should be construed
literally or liberally nor whether the transaction is not unreal and not
prohibited by the statute, but whether the transaction is a device to avoid
tax and whether the transaction is such that the judicial process may accord
its approval to it. It is neither fair nor desirable to expect the Legislature
to intervene and take care of every device and scheme to avoid taxation. It is
up to the court to take stock to determine the nature of the new and
sophisticated legal devices to avoid tax and to expose the devices for what
they really are and to refuse to give judicial benediction.

By the Court: "The evil consequences of tax avoidance are manifold. First,
there is substantial loss of much needed public revenue, particularly in a
welfare State like ours. Next, there is the serious disturbance caused to the
economy of the country by the piling up of mountains of black money, directly
causing inflation. Then there is 'the large hidden loss' to the community by
some of the best brains in the country being involved in the perpetual war
waged between the tax avoider and his expert team of advisers, lawyers and
accountants on one side and the tax gatherer and his, perhaps not so skilful,
advisers, on the other side. Then again there is the 'sense of injustice and
inequality which tax avoidance arouses in the breasts of those who are
unwilling or unable to profit by it'. Last, but not the least, is the ethics
of transferring the burden of tax liability to the shoulders of the guideless,
good citizens from those of the 'artful dodgers'."

In the instant case, the AO has failed to demonstrate whether the transaction
constituted a colourable device so as to avoid tax. Hence, I cannot concur
with him on this point at all.

 Secondly, the certificate of beneficial ownership furnished by the taxpayer
is the interpretation arrived at by the Netherlands authorities. Indian Courts
may not necessarily agree with the interpretation of the Netherlands
authorities.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 46 of 331 Certificate of
residency has been filed before me by the assessee which bears the stamp and
seal of the Irish Revenue Authorities stationed at Dublin and the Mumbai Bench
has clearly held that this constitute sufficient evidence regarding status of
assessee.

 Thirdly, Circular 789 specifically deals with the India-Mauritius tax
treaty. It cannot be applied to India-Netherlands tax treaty.

The wisdom of the Hon'ble High Court of this Country cannot be challenged by
an AO.

 Fourthly and most importantly, the Tax Residency Certificate (TRC), which is
subject matter of Circular 789 relied up on by the Court, has nothing to do
with the beneficial ownership.

The wisdom of the Hon'ble High Court of this Country cannot be challenged by
an AO.

9\. For reasons mentioned, I am of the view that the case of the assessee is
on `all fours" vis-a-vis a judgement of the Hon'ble High Court as mentioned
and the action of the AO cannot be sustained in first appeal. Hence, all grow
ids are covered and in the result, appeal filed by the assessee is allowed in
part."

16\. Being aggrieved with the order of the CIT(A), assessee as well as the
Revenue are in appeal before the Tribunal.

17\. The learned Counsel for the assessee Shri. Percy Pardiwala, Sr. Advocate
has invited our attention to certain facts explained by the assessee through
affidavit filed by its Director Mr. Hari Raju with the submission that
assessee company was incorporated on 16.12.2003 under the Companies Act and in
2004, assessee company set up its first office at Bangalore to provide
Information Technology (IT) Services to Google Inc., USA (hereinafter called
as "Google Inc"). Vide agreement dated 01.04.2004 entered into between the
appellant company and GIL, the appellant company was to provide IT enabled
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 47 of 331 services (ITES) to
GIL. Pursuant to the same, the appellant company set up an ITES division in
Hyderabad for provision of ITES services. The primary activity being carried
out by the ITES division of the appellant company involves rendering of
support services in administering the Google editorial and Government's
guidelines in relation to global advertisements ("Ad review") manually before
the advertisements can be placed on Google Web properties. Thereafter, the
appellant company entered into Google AdWords Program Distribution Agreement
dated 12.12.2005 with GIL pursuant to which the appellant company was
appointed as a non-exclusive, authorized distributor of online advertisement
space to advertisers in India under Google AdWords Program.

18\. Subsequently, the appellant company entered into a Google Reseller
Agreement on 01.07.2012 with GIL, pursuant to which the earlier agreement
dated 12.12.2005 was terminated and the appellant company was appointed as
non-exclusive, authorized reseller of online advertising space to advertisers
in India under the Google AdWords Program.

19\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further contended that the entire
case of the Revenue is that the payment made by the appellant company to GIL
amounts of consideration for the right to use copyright/trade
mark/process/software. The case of the Revenue is also that the payment made
by the Appellant Company to GIL amounts to consideration for the grant of
distribution rights of Google AdWords Program and since IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 48 of 331 the same is covered within the
meaning of "similar property", payments thereof is 'Royalty'. It was further
contended that the assumption on which the AO has proceeded on to conclude
that the payments made by the Appellant partake the character of royalty, are
unfounded and needless to state, were drawn owing to lack of proper enquiry
and investigation by the AO. It was further submitted that the function of the
appellant is that of mere distributor having no access to the alleged
intellectual properties as alleged by the AO and any such access to such
intellectual property is only the incidental to the distribution function, for
which no separate payment is made.

20\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further placed a reliance upon the
affidavit dated 13.03.2018 filed by Mr. Hari Raju (Director of the Appellant
Company) in which it is clarified that the activities performed by the
Appellant Company, pursuant to agreement dated 01.04.2004, entered into with
GIL are for the rendering of ITES services independently of the activities
pursuant to agreement dated 12.12.2005 (superseded pursuant to agreement dated
12.12.2005) for distribution/reselling of online advertisement space to Indian
advertisers and vice-versa. It has also been clarified through this affidavit
that the Appellant Company does not have access to personal information of the
user of any Google services offered on the internet and therefore is no
capacity to provide access to anyone regarding such information.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 49 of 331

21\. The learned Counsel for the assessee Mr. Pardiwala further invited our
attention to the fact that at different points of time, various law
enforcement agencies in India approached the Appellant Company with a request
for personal information about various users of Google services offered on the
internet, to which the Appellant Company has no other option but to decline
such request. In order to justify these facts, the assessee has filed the
copies of communications exchanged between them and the law enforcement
agencies. It was further contended that from these evidences, it is clear that
the appellant company has no access to the personal information of users of
Google services except information about advertisers using Google AdWord
Programs.

22\. It was further explained in the affidavit that approximately 94% of
global advertisements i.e., advertisements to be published for advertisers
across globe, are reviewed by an automated system based
onservers/infrastructure located outside India and approximately 6% of the
advertisements are routed by the automated system for manual review by ITES
teams based globally out of which ITES division of the Appellant in India is
one of such centre. Online advertisements flagged for manual review from
around the world are sent to any of such divisions located around the world
based on language used in the advertisement and operative time of each such
ITES centre around the world. The routing of advertisement for review is a
purely system driven automated process with no human intervention. It was
further contended that while performing the manual Ad review IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 50 of 331 via its ITES division as specifically
identified, has no control over choosing advertisements/advertisers for manual
review, uploaded by a specific advertiser from a specific country. For
providing these services, GIL pays a service fee to the Appellant in terms of
the agreement dated 01.04.2004.

23\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further invited our attention to
certain facts with the submission that in order to carry out its distribution
function under the distribution agreement, the appellant has a separate sales
and marketing team working from its Gurgaon and Mumbai Office and its team
operates independently of the ITES and other divisions of the Appellalnt and
is dedicated purely to the distribution segment of the Appellant. The
functions of this team are to ensure promotion of Google AdWord services,
billing and collection of payments and other day to day business operations
relating to the distribution segment of the Appellant's business. It was
further clarified that as per terms of agreement, GIL has also supplied online
advertisement space to the appellant for online sales to the advertisers in
India. The distribution team as part of its sales and marketing function,
under Distribution Agreement, provides necessary support, clarifications and
assistance to its customers in India (advertisers who have chosen to pay in
INR) and in the course of providing aforesaid assistance, the team has access
to the AdWords account created by that advertiser. In any case, the
distribution team of the Appellant has no access to data/personal information
pertaining to end user of any of the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 51 of 331 Google properties such as the Google Search Engine etc; like
his name, age, gender, etc. The Appellant Company also does not even have
access to the Internet Protocol ("IP") address of users of any Google service
and therefore is not in a position to share that with anyone/advertisers
(including Government and law enforcement agencies).

24\. It was further contended that the Appellant does not operate any platform
or gateway or is not the proprietary/licencee of any technology/tools/features
that are part of the Google AdWords Program and therefore does not have access
to or control over the infrastructure or processes that are involved in
running the Google AdWords Program. It was further clarified that while
performing the distribution activities, the Appellant does not have access or
capacity to control the display of advertisements online. Even in other
products of Google for example, GMAIL (email services) a person accessing his
GMAIL account may be exposed to certain advertisements, which an advertiser
might have chosen to be displayed on GMAIL, however, the Appellant has no role
to play in such display of advertisements on GMAIL. Only an advertiser using
Google AdWords Program, in his sole discretion, can choose which web property
to have his advertisement displayed and in what manner.

25\. It was further contended that Google AdWord Program is a "self-

serve"onlineadvertising service provided by Google (Google Inc./GIL) for
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 52 of 331 businesseswanting to
display advertisement in relation to their websites and products on Google
online property or a third party online property. The advertisers are required
to upload his/her billing information, without which he/she will not be able
to conclude the account of creation process and his/her advertisement would
not be displayed. Once the advertiser chooses India as his/her location and
INR as his billing currency, he gets into a contract with the appellant,
subject to him agreeing terms and conditions. The advertisers that use Google
AdWords Program for advertising on Google Search Engine can create relevant
advertisement by selecting anappropriate title and text to describe its
business and the forms of text of the advertisement. The advertiser also
selects keywords or phrases that may match with a "search query" (relevant to
the business of such advertiser) that people input while using Google Search
Engine. The keywords are used to trigger an advertisement that is relevant to
the search query of the user. Multiple advertisers can choose the same
Keyword. The keywords or phrases are neithersold or allowed to be used
exclusively by anyone advertiser.

26\. It was further explained that the advertisement on the google search
engine is displayed as "sponsored link" with a tab marked as "AD". It may be
displayed at the top of the organic search results that are linked to various
websites that are relevant to the "search query" and user of the Google Search
Engine has a input. The organic search IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 53 of 331 results are ranked and displayed algorithmically on the basis
of certain objectivecriteria amongst them being relevance. Clicking on a
website link that is part of the organic search result does not result in any
revenue for the appellant. The Google AdWords Program uses cost per click
pricing methodology which means, for example that advertiser pays only when
his/her advertisement in the form of "sponsored link"getsclicked by a user of
the Google Search Engine. The price per click is determined by the advertiser
in his/her sole discretion and the Appellant has no role in negotiating such
price. The advertiser does not pay the appellant for the display of the
advertisement.

27\. It was further contended that the advertiser sets a daily budget, as per
his own discretion, using the web interface of Google AdWords program, which,
when achieved the advertisement of the advertiser stops displaying. The
appellant has no role in negotiating such budget except for providing customer
support services to the advertiser in order to familiarize the advertiser of
various features of the Google AdWord Program.

The Google AdWord Program is an independent product offered online to any one
who wants to advertise its business. The pre-conditions for the proper use of
Google AdWords Program are the requirement of having an e-mail account, a
website for one's business, who wishes to advertise and billing details. There
are no other conditions for an advertiser to be able to use Google AdWords
Program. Once the advertisement is created by the advertiser using the web
interface of Google AdWords Program, the same is uploaded and IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 54 of 331 stored on data servers outside India
and advertisement uploaded by an Indian advertiser located in India or
elsewhere may be reviewed by the ITES division of the Appellant, if routed to
such division of the Appellant by the automated system, and the Appellant's
ITES division has no control over which advertisements are routed to it for
review. The review process is only for ensuring that the advertisement does
not violate editorial guidelines of Google and local Government regulations of
the jurisdiction where advertisement needs to be displayed.

28\. Mr. Pardiwala further contended that the fundamental submissions of the
assessee which has been completely missed by the AO is that the revenue
arising from the distribution agreement dated 12.12.2005 and superceded by the
reseller agreement dated 01.07.2012 whereby the distributor or reseller's
rights were granted to the assessee owing to the nature of the business income
in the hands of the non-resident and in the absence of the permanent
establishment such non-resident in India no portion of such income could have
been brought to tax. It was further submitted that the resort to section
9(1)(vi) of the Act is contrary to the legal position since 9(1)(vi) is
applicable only to taxation of passive income. Thus in the absence of any
permanent establishment, the income of non-resident was not chargeable to tax
in India and consequently there arose no occasion for the applicability of
section 195 and 201 of the Act. He further placed reliance upon the order of
the Tribunal in the case of ITO Vs. Right Florist Pvt. Ltd., (2013) 25 ITR
(T.) 639, IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 55 of 331
Pinstrom Technology Ltd., Vs. ITO (2012) 54 SOT 78 (Mum. Trib.) and Yahoo
India Pvt.

Ltd., Vs. CIT 140 TTJ 195 (Mum.Trib.),in support of his contention that
payment made to non-resident of India for purchase of online space to be in
nature of business income or in the absence of permanent establishment (PE) of
such non-resident it cannot be taxable in India.

29\. In support of above contention, reliance was also placed upon the order
of the Tribunal (Mumbai Bench) in case of Set India Pvt. Ltd., in ITA
No.4372/Mum/2004 in which it has been held that right of distribution is
purely a commercial right which is distinct from right to use copyright and
hence payment to non-resident under distribution agreement does not constitute
royalty. Reliance was also placed upon the judgment of Taj TV Ltd., in ITA No.
4678/Mum/2007 wherein it was held that distribution income payable to the
assessee company is a business profit and cannot be taxed in India in the
absence of permanent establishment of the recipient in India. It was further
contended by the learned Counsel for the assessee that it is not open for the
Tribunal to be dissuaded with the Co-

ordinate Bench's decision and to form a independent opinion without referring
the matter to the special bench in the light of judgment of the Apex Court in
the case of UOI Vs. Paras Laminates Pvt. Ltd., (1991) AIR 1991 SC - 696 and
the order of the Tribunal in the case of DCIT Vs. Sumit Securities (2011) 11
ITR (T) 88 (Mum.Trib. Special Bench).

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 56 of 331

30\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further invited our attention to the
assessment order for the assessment year 2008-09 where the appellant was
constituted a dependent agency PE of GIL i.e., non-resident. In that case,
there was no whisper by the AO that receipt in the hands of non-resident par-
took the character of royalty income. The absurdity of the whole situation
further gets highlighted by the AO not even adverting the position of article
12 of the treaty where the provisions of article 12(4) specifically excludes
the application of article 12 where there is a permanent establishment of non-

resident in the house country. The learned Counsel for the assessee further
contended that department needs to make up its mind whether the non-resident
has a permanent establishment or not. It is only when certain determination is
concluded, the article 12 can be applied to determine whether receipts are in
the nature of royalty income.

31\. The learned Counsel Mr. Pardiwala further invited our attention that from
July 2016, the legislature in its wisdom has introduced the equalization levy.
The whole purpose of bringing this levy was to avoid protected litigation on
the existence of permanent establishment and to capture the income of non-
resident who on account of absence of permanent establishment as per the
existing provisions under treaty, escaped the net of taxation in India. It was
further contended that in assessment year 2017-18, 2018-19, the department has
taken a position that equalization levy is applicable on payment made by the
advertiser to non-resident for the purchase of online advertisement
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 57 of 331 space. These
oscillating views taken by the department reflects the confusion behind
department's logic to bring to tax receipts under dispute tax in India and are
thus devoid of any merit. Therefore, the order CIT(A) treating the remittance
to GIL as royalty, deserves to be set aside.

32\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further invited our attention to
provisions of Finance Bill, 2016 with the submission that the legislature has
introduced the equalization levy at 6% of the amount of consideration for
specific service received/receivable by non-

resident not having permanent establishment (PE) in India, from the resident
in India who carries out business or profession or from a non-resident having
permanent establishment in India with certain safe guards. Keeping in view the
object of introduction of equalization levy on specific payments to non-AE,
the payment made by the assessee to its AE under Distributor AdWord Agreement
should be considered as business profit in the hands of non-resident.

33\. The learned Counsel for the assessee has also invited our attention to
provisions of article 12 of DTAA with Ireland with the submission that the
term royalty used in this article means the payment of any kind received as
consideration for the use of or the right to use, any copyright of literary,
artistic, scientific work including cinematography, films, etc. As per the
definition of word royalty as per DTAA, royalty can only be taxed on receipt
basis in the hands of the recipient i.e., non-resident. In the instant case,
the AO IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 58 of 331
has treated the deemed income of royalty only on accrual basis. Therefore, the
taxability of royalty in the impugned assessment year under section 9(1)(vi)
is improper. In support of his contention, he placed reliance upon the order
of the Tribunal in the case of Pizzahut International Inc., Vs. DCIT (2012)
Taxmann.com 111 Delhi, Booz. Allen & Hamilton (India) Ltd. & Co. Kg.,Vs. ACIT
in ITA No.4502 to 4508/Mum/2003 and judgment of the Bombay High Court in the
case of DIT Vs. Siemens aktiengesellschaft in ITA No.124/2010.

34\. Mr. Percy Pardiwala had also placed a reliance upon the order of the
Tribunal in the case of CSC Technologies Singapore Pte. Ltd., Vs. ADIT (2012)
19 Taxmann.com 123, National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd., Vs. DCIT
(2006) 5 SOT 317 Mumbai and Saira Asia Interiors Pvt. Ltd., ITA No. 673/2014
in support of his contentions that DTAA tax liability can arise only at the
point of payment and not at the time of crediting the amount. Therefore, at
the time crediting the amount, there cannot be an occasion for deduction or
withholding the tax on such income.

35\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further placed a reliance upon the
judgment of Delhi High Court in the case of Formula One World Championship
(2016) 76 Taxmann.com 6 (Del), and DIT Vs. Sherton International Inc., 313 ITR
267 in support of his contention that use of intellectual property (Trade mark
) as incidental to main purpose IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 59 of 331 of agreement, does not enable the payment thereof to qualify
under the definition of Royalty under the Act or by AO.

36\. Mr. Percy Pardiwala further contended that assessee had a bonafide belief
for non-

deducting the TDS on the payment made on account of AdWord Program to the GIL,
as there was no disallowance at earlier occasion. Moreover, the GIL has no PE
in India therefore the assessee/appellant was under a bonafide belief that TDS
is not required to be deducted on the payment to GIL which in fact is a
business receipt in its hand. In support of his contention he placed a
reliance of the judgement in the case of CIT Vs. Kotex Securities Ltd., 383
ITR 0001 (SC).

37\. In oppugnation, learned Standing Counsel for the department, Shri. K. A.
Arvind invited our attention to the fact that in Google AdWord Program
distribution agreement dated 12.12.2005, the GIPL was granted the marketing
and distribution rights of AdWord Program to the advertisers in India. The
amount credited by GIPL to the account of GIL could constitute sum chargeable
under the provisions of the Act as the payment is in the nature of royalty for
the purpose of licence to use intellectual property rights.

38\. Mr. Arvind has further contended that the AO has considered the judgment
of the Madras High Court in the case of Consine IndiaPvt. LTd., Vs. Google
India Pvt. Ltd., dated 30.09.2010 in which the concept of search engine and
its operation was explained, IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 60 of 331 while adjudicating the issue of nature of payment made by GIPL
to GIL. It was further contended that as per clause 2.6 of the AdWord Program
Distribution Agreement, the distributor (GIPL) will provide after sales
services to advertisers in accordance with broad instructions, training and
standards of Google. Clause 3.1 of the AdWord agreement further provides for
Google Ireland (GIL) to provide advertising space through the AdWord Programme
for distribution by the distributor i.e., GIPL/Appellant to advertisers as set
forth therein. As per clause 3.4, GILagrees to provide minimum level of
service as specified in exhibit "C". As per exhibit "C" all advertiser shall
be instructed by the distributor to contact distributor directly for support
and not to communicate directly with the GIL. Mr. Arvind has further invited
our attention to clause 7 of the Agreement according to which disclosure of
confidential and/or proprietary information disclosed hereunder, including the
user data (including any aggregated user data), the existence and content of
this agreement, and any information provided pursuant to this agreement shall
be governed by the Google standard mutual non-Disclosure Agreement executed by
the parties prior to or concurrently with this agreement. He further invited
our attention to clause 8 of the agreement, according to which the distributor
shall maintain all user data in accordance with the local laws and regulation
applicable to such data and shall implement policies and procedures with
respect to user data that are atleast as protective IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 61 of 331 of the rights of the advertisers as
is provided in the Google Privacy Policy set forth and all relevant policies
employed therein.

39\. The learned Standing Counsel further invited our attention to Services
Agreement dated 01.04.2004 with the submission that from the reading of the
Services Agreement it is clear that GIPL has been provided with confidential
information as referred to in clause 1.2 of the Services Agreement and as per
clause 3.3, the GIPL shall perform the services only for Google Ireland or its
affiliates and consequently it shall not render any similar services to any
other person. It was further contended that as per clause 6.1 of Service
Agreement, the GIL will disclose certain confidential information to Google
India solely to permit Google India to perform its obligations under the
agreement. It was also stipulated in the Service Agreement that the Appellant
agrees that such confidential information shall be kept secret by the
Appellant during the term of the Agreement and as per clause 12.5, on
termination of the Service Agreement, Google India shall discontinue using of
confidential information, documentation, intellectual property and the
software technology and shall have no further rights with respect thereto. On
termination, the Appellant shall immediately return to Google Ireland or
destroy all copies of confidential information, documentation and the software
embodiments in its possession or control.

Upon termination of this agreement, GIL will have the option in its sole
discretion of "(1) electing at any time to fulfil any unfinished service
itself or by contracting with other IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 62 of 331 affiliates or third parties and / or (ii) permitting Google
India to continue to provide any unfinished services and continue to use
confidential information/documentation, intellectual property and the software
to the extent necessary to provide such services pursuant to the limited
licence agreement to be entered into between Google Ireland and Google India,
following such termination or expiration.

40\. The learned Standing Counsel further contended that from the reading of
all clauses of the service agreement in conjunction with Google AdWord Program
Distribution Agreement, it is clear beyond doubt that Google India has been
provided with thelicence to use IP for which Google India has agreed to make
certain payments to Google Ireland and same is in the nature of royalty, as
per provisions of section 9(1)(vi) of the Act read with DTAA. It was further
contended that Google Ireland is allowing Google India to access all
intellectual properties and confidential information and the same is being
used by the Appellant (Google India) for the activities related to
distribution agreement. The obligation/distribution of the services agreement
would make it clear that both the documents cannot be separated from each
other and are to be read together. Therefore, for the purpose of marketing and
distribution activities, Google India is granted the right to use the valuable
business asset of Google Ireland, which includes intellectual Property in the
products and services offered by GIL.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 63 of 331

41\. The ld. Counsel for the Revenue, Mr. Aravind, has further contended that
contention of the assessee that Adwords Distribution agreement dated
12.12.2005 is entered into by the marketing & distribution services for
Adwords program division and the service agreement dated 01.04.2004 is entered
into by ITES division and they are not interrelated, cannot be accepted. It is
an admitted position that the appellant has an obligation to the advertiser to
provide pre-sales and post-sales services and the pre-sale and post-sale
services can only be provided through ITES division of the appellant with
access to the database and the confidential information owned by Google
Ireland and licenced to Google India, the appellant. In view of the agreement
being entered by Google India with Google Ireland either on 12.12.2005 or on
01.04.2004 for the same purpose, the division of services by Google India by
different divisions does not take away the impact of reading of both the
agreements together, therefore both the agreements are inseparable. By reading
of the obligations of Google India in both the agreements, it makes it clear
that both the agreements has to be read together and cannot be acted upon
independent of each other. Hence the contention of the assessee that both the
agreements are different is an after-thought and liable to rejected.

42\. It was further submitted by Mr. Arvind that IP of Google resides in
search engine technology, associated software and other features and hence
right to use for performing various activities like accepting advertisements
and providing after sales services would IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 64 of 331 clearly fall within the ambit of "Royalty".
As per the terms of the distribution agreement, the appellant has been
authorized to sell or offer for sale the Adword program to the advertisers
which is nothing but granting of licence to appellant to sell or offer for
sale to advertisers with certain rights. By acquiring the distribution and
marketing rights, the appellant has been granted licence in respect of
Adword's program to sell or offer for sale certain rights to the advertisrs
and such rights or the right to use the Adword program. Therefore, the licence
to use the Adword program by the copyright holder is licenced to market and
sell the Adword program. The licence to use the adword program (search engine)
which is copyrighted by Google would amount to right to use the copyright.

43\. Mr. Aravind further placed reliance upon the judgment of the
jurisdictional High Court in the case of CIT v. Synopsis International Ltd.
(2013) 2012 Taxman 454, CIT& Anr. V. Samsung Electronics Ltd., & Ors. 345 ITR
494, CIT v. CGI Information Systems and Management Consultants Pvt. Ltd.,
(2014) 226 Taxman 319 (Kar) and AAR judgment No.985/2010 dated 28.07.2015 in
Skillsoft of Ireland Ltd., the order of the Bangalore Bench of the Tribunal in
the case of Vodafone South Ltd. v. DDIT(IT) (2015) 53 taxmann.com 441 (Bang.
Trib.) and ABB FZ-LCC (2017) 83 taxmann.com 86 (Bang.

ITAT) in support of his contention that the amount paid towards licence to use
IPR is in the nature of royalty and chargeable under section195 of the Act.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 65 of 331

44\. It was further contended that licence to sell presupposes licence being
granted to the distributor (Google India) and licence to sell enables Google
India to transaction the licence/right to use the Adword program. Therefore
the consideration paid is for the licence to enable Google India to resell the
licence/right to use to the advertisers would amount to payment of a royalty,
because without licence if sale of advertisement space to the advertiser by
the appellant in the search engine of Google, which is an IP would amount to
infringement of the rights being enjoyed by Google Ireland.

45\. The ld. Standing counsel Mr. Arvind further contended that under the
distribution agreement, the appellant has been granted the right to use
trademarks and brand features for the purpose of selling the advertisement
space and the licence to use the IP being tool of the trade for the appellant,
right to use Google trademarks and brand features without any ambiguity, would
amount to licence to use IP and the consideration for its use constitutes
royalty chargeable u/s. 195 of the Act.

46\. It was further contended that under the distribution agreement, the
appellant has been granted the distribution right involving the transfer of
rights in process. The entire search engine technology on which licence has
been granted to Google India for selling advertisement space to the
advertisers is a "process" and the search engine technology is an IP. Hence
consequential payment for the licence to use the process being an IP is
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 66 of 331 royalty. In view of
clause 3.1 of the distribution agreement, the appellant was granted transfer
of know-how and has also been provided access to internal tools for performing
the obligations under the Adword agreement. The statements recorded from the
persons concerned of the Google India which is reproduced by the AO in his
order, would make it clear that marketing, distribution and maintenance of the
Adword program is a responsibility of Google India involving knowledge of
tools and training on its usage, knowledge of trademark policy, add content
policy, access to database and access to confidential information. Such
knowledge has been imparted through extensive training by Google Ireland to
the appellant which would amount to transfer of know-how and liable for tax
u/s. 9(1)(vi) of the Act as royalty.

47\. The ld. Standing counsel further invited our attention to nondisclosure
agreement which is Exhibit-B of the distribution agreement with the submission
that it clearly demonstrates that by virtue of the disclosure of the
confidential information and access provided to the confidential information
to the appellant by Google Ireland, the sums payable by Google India to Google
Ireland is for information, know-how and skill imparted to Google India, i.e.,
the appellant. It was further contended that grant of distribution rights
involves use of industrial, commercial and scientific equipment.

Adword platform is similar to portal running on servers and Adword's platform
is based on search engine technology of Google. Hence Adword program is
commercial and IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 67 of 331
scientific equipment and without having access to the servers running on the
Adword platform, the appellant cannot perform its functions/exploit its rights
as per the distribution agreement. Hence the distribution rights includes the
right to use the industrial, commercial and scientific equipment which are the
servers. He further placed reliance upon the judgment of the AAR in the case
of Cargo Community Network Ltd., 159 Taxman 243 in which it has been held that
portal and server together constitute integrated commercial and scientific
equipment and for obtaining internet access to airlines, the use of portal
without server is unthinkable. Therefore it is a irresistible conclusion that
payment for concurrent access to utilize the sophisticated services offered by
the portal would be covered by the expression "royalty".

48\. The ld. Standing counsel further contended that though the above aspect
has not been agreed by the CIT(Appeals), the reasons and the findings recorded
by the AO could be relevant for considering the matter under the remaining
heads like know-how, trademark and process. It was further contended that from
a reading of the definition of royalty under the DTAA, it is clear that the
amounts paid by Google India under the distribution agreement is towards
royalty.

49\. Mr. Arvind further placed a reliance upon the judgment of Hon'ble Madras
High Court in the case of Verizon Communications Singapore Private Ltd. v.
ITO, 361 ITR 575 in which it has been held that payment for licence to use the
IPR amounts to a IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 68 of 331
royalty. Reliance was also placed upon the judgment of AAR in the case of
Citrix Systems Asia-Pacific Pvt. Ltd., 343 ITR 1 wherein it was held that
payment from distribution for sale/licensing of software product which is
copyrighted amounts to licence to use the IPR and is liable for tax under the
Act as well as the DTAA as royalty. Further reliance was also placed upon the
judgment of AAR in the case of Cargo Community Network Ltd. reported at 289
ITR 355 in which it was held that portal is a scientific equipment and amounts
paid towards right to use in industrial, commercial and scientific equipment
would be covered by the expression royalty under the Act as well as the DTAA.
He further placed reliance upon the order of the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal
in the case of Gracemac Corporation v. ADIT (2010)41 DTR 65 in which it was
held that licence to use the copyright would fall within the ambit of royalty
under the Act as well as the DTAA.

50\. The ld. Standing counsel further invited our attention to the documents
relating to functioning of Google Adword program from pages 416 to 528 of the
Paper book filed by the appellant through which the assessee has tried to
explain the functions of Google Adword program, with the submission that from
the reading of the relevant material filed before the Tribunal, it is clear
that the appellant has provided the following services in brief to the
advertisers:-

> a. Display network tab IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
> 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
> IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
> Page 69 of 331 b. Toolbar c. Placement tool d. Keyword Targeting e. Location
> and Language Targeting(Target Entire country, target Metro areas, countries
> or cities, target a radius around the location) f. Device Targeting g.
> Contextual Targeting h. Topic Targeting i. Audience Targeting j. Gender
> Targeting k. Age-group Targeting l. Manual and Automatic Bidding m. Billing
> Information and backup credit card payment n. Budget Targeting

51\. These services cannot be provided without there being a licence or access
to IPR and database. He further invited our attention to the agreement entered
into with the appellant and customer/advertiser, according to which, the
appellant has retained the option of accepting/rejecting the advertisement,
continuation/termination of the advertisement and also the nature of billing
system. This would demonstrate further access to the IPR which would amount to
use the licence to use and the payment is in the nature of royalty.

52\. The ld. Standing counsel further invited our attention to the statements
of Shri Arijit Sarkar and Shri Vikas Agnihotri, who made it clear that the
appellant was provided access to the tools which are in the nature of IPR for
providing services in pursuance to the agreement by Google India with Google
Ireland and the advertisers. It was further contended that Google India is
providing AdSense services and generating revenue by IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 70 of 331 utilizing licence to use IPR and
hence payment for such use is royalty. He further invited our attention to the
statements made by the assessee before the TPO dated 5.2.2013, copy of the
same is placed at page 56 of paper book filed by the revenue, wherein the
assessee has admitted that data processing work and review of the
advertisement as per the editorial guidelines is carried out by the appellant.
These services cannot be rendered by the appellant without licence/access to
database/IPRs.

53\. The ld. Standing counsel further invited our attention to the book of
'Learning Google Adwords and Google Analytics' authored by Benjamin Goldman
with the submission that Mr. Benjamin Goldman was a co-founder & CEO at Loves
Data and was the first trainer certified by Google both for Google Adwords and
Google Analytics. As per the opinion of the author which can be considered an
expert opinion, Google India in pursuance of distribution agreement and Adword
sale agreement with the advertiser would be rendering the following services:-

> a. Display Keyword Targeting b. Placement Targeting.

> c. Topic Targeting.

> d. Interest Categories.

> e. Remarketing.

> f. Gender Targeting.

> g. Age Targeting.

> h. Parent Status Targeting.

> i. Display Campaign Optimiser j. Location Targeting, Network Targeting k.
> Physical Location Targeting IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
> 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
> IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
> Page 71 of 331 l. Schedule Targeting m. YouTube Targeting n. Device
> Targeting o. AdSense

54\. He further invited our attention to the reply of the assessee dated
28.01.2013 filed before the TPO for the AY 2009-10 in which it has been
clearly admitted that the payment for rendering ITES (pre and post sale
services) are on the basis of the percentage of distribution fee from India.
The above aspect further makes it clear that distribution agreement and the
service agreement is interdependent and has to be read together and
inseparable.

55\. The ld. Standing counsel further contended that in view of the above
position, it is clear that licence granted by Google Ireland in favour of the
appellant is for exploitation of the search enginge being IPR and the IPR has
been used by the appellant as tool of the trade and hence payment is in the
nature of royalty liable to tax under the Act as well as the DTAA.

56\. It was further contended that judgments relied upon by the assessee in
the case of Right Florist Pvt. Ltd. (supra) is not applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the case as in that case the advertisers had only placed
advertisement in the search engine and no right in the IPR was conferred on
the advertisers. Similar is the position with the judgment of Yahoo India
(supra) on which heavy reliance is placed by the assessee. In IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 72 of 331 that case the transaction does not
involve licence to use any IPRs and no access to the server. The payment is
only commission for procuring advertisement, whereas in the present case right
from review of the ad, acceptance of the ad and uploading the same including
the post sale services are being provided by the appellantand without
involving use or right to use IPR the said obligation cannot be performed.
Similar is the position with the decision of Pinstorm Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
and Set India Pvt. Ltd.

(supra). In those cases, the facts are entirely different as nowhere the
assessee either involved to provide post sales service or licence to use the
IPRs. Therfore, the judgments cannot be relied in favour of the assessee.

57\. In so far as the reference made by the assessee to High Power Committee
dated 16.12.1999 and Tax Treaty dated 01.02.2001, it was contended that
payment by the advertiser directly to the owner of the search engine could not
amount to royalty and there is no dispute on these facts, but the facts of the
impugned cases are entirely different.

58\. With regard to taxability of royalty as per DTAA, the ld. Standing
counsel has contended that language of definition of royalty in DTAA does not
suggest that amount paid to Google Ireland is taxable in the year of receipt
and hence no obligation to deduct tax at source on credit basis. Section
195(1) of the Act imposes obligation on the assessee to deduct tax at source
in respect of payment made to non-resident where the IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 73 of 331 sum is chargeable under the
provisions of the Act. It is held by the Apex Court in the case of GE India
reported at (2010) 193 Taxman 234 (SC) and Ellie Lilly reported at (2009)178
Taxman 505 (SC) that provisions of section 195 has to be read along with
charging provisions i.e., section 4, 5, 9 & 90 of the Act. On conjoint reading
of the above provisions, it is clear that the amounts paid by the assessee to
Google Ireland are chargeable under the Act on accrual basis. Hence contention
of assessee that amount is chargeable in the hands of Google Ireland on
receipt basis is misplaced.

59\. It was further contended that if the language of definition of royalty
under DTAA with Ireland under article 12(3)(a) is read, the wordings of the
term "royalties" as used in this article means payment of any kind received as
consideration for the use ....."

would clearly and unambiguously makes it clear that payment received as
consideration for the use would alone be considered as royalty. The words
"payments of any kind received as a consideration for the use of" has to be
read together and it would only mean the classification of the income and not
the method of accounting. Hence the contention of the assessee is misplaced.

60\. The ld. Standing counsel further invited our attention to the fact that
the assessee has provided IT services IT enabled services to Google Ireland in
addition to marketing and distribution services for the adverts program. The
assessee will be receiving amounts for IT services and IT enabled services
from Google Ireland according to IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 74 of 331 services agreement and assessee will be paying Google Ireland
in view of the marketing and distribution services for Adword program. It is
an undisputed fact that the assessee is wholly owned subsidiary of Google. In
view of the close connection between Google India and Google Ireland, the
payments to be received by the assessee for IT services and IT enabled
services from GIL can be adjusted towards payment made to GIL towards
marketing and distribution services for Adword program.The fact that the
assessee has not reflected the amounts paid to Google Ireland in the P&L
account would further justify the above aspect.

61\. In the above context if the language employed in article 12(3)(a) of the
DTAA specifically with the words "means payment of any kind received" would
mean the receipt of amount by virtue of adjustment/set off in the books of
account of the assessee.

Further "payment of any kind received" has to be read as any mode of payment
either by book adjustment/credit or actual payment. Any other meaning would
read the language redundant in view of the provisons of section 4, 5, 9, 90 &
195 of the Act. The DTAA does not determine the method of accounting and the
year of taxability in respect of parties to the agreement. What the DTAA
provides for is the extent of taxability of income and the percentage of the
tax on the income liable for tax and the distribution of tax among the
countries party to the DTAA. Hence the language employed in defining the
meaning of royalty cannot be read to mean the method of accounting. The DTAA
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 75 of 331 does not deal with the
year of taxability or the method of accounting of either parties.

The only section which has imposed obligation on the assessee is section
195(1) of the Act which obligates the assessee to deduct tax at source in
respect of the income chargeable under the Act. The section does not empower
the payer to examine the applicability of the DTAA to the payee. The language
of section 90(2) of the Act makes it very clear beyond any doubt that option
to exercise the benefit of either the Act or the DTAA is conferred on the non-
resident. Hence at the stage of payment without there being any indication by
the recipient, the payer cannot step into the shoes of recipient to exercise
the option provided u/s. 90(2) and claim the benefit of DTAA. Therefore the
contention of the assessee that receipt in the hands of Google Ireland is
liable to be taxed on cash basis is completely baseless, also for the reason
that Google Ireland itself has filed return of income for the AY 2007-08 and
2008-09 and has declared its method followed for accounting as mercantile
system of accounting. It was further contended that in the case of Vodafone
South Ltd., the Tribunal has categorically held that applicability of DTAA is
not automatic and what is to be considered at the time of payment by the
assessee is only regarding the chargeability of income under the Act and the
assessee cannot be permitted to take shelter under the DTAA as the benefit of
DTAA is conferred only on the non-resident recipient. He further placed
reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Standard Triumph
Motor, 201 ITR 391 IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 76 of 331
wherein it has been held that method of accounting adopted by the recipient is
irrelevant and credit in the books of account of the payer is sufficient to
attract taxability. He also placed reliance upon the judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of Palam Gas Service v. CIT reported at (2017) 81
taxmann.com 43 (SC).

62\. The judgments relied upon by the assessee in support of his contention in
the case of Siemens, Booz Allen, National Organic Chemicals, Pizza Hut, CSC
Technology and Saira Asia are not applicable to the present case as the scope
of section 90(2) of the Act and the effect of charging provisions of section
4, 5 & 9 have not been examined. In the absence of any authority in favour of
the assessee, the assessee cannot presume that the non-resident would be
claiming benefit under the DTAA.

63\. If the terms of the payment as agreed between the parties is examined, it
is clear that on periodic intervals the amounts are liable to be paid and in
the light of these facts, the contention of the assessee are contrary to the
claim that amount is taxable in the hands of the non-resident on receipt
basis. He further placed heavy reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court in
the case of Vodafone International Holdings BV, 341 ITR 1 (SC) at para 67 & 68
with the submission that in order to examine the real transaction, the
corporate veil is required to be lifted. If the agreement entered into between
the assessee and Google Ireland is examined by bearing in mind the subsidiary
relationship between the two, especially to Exhibit-A dealing with the payment
terms & IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 77 of 331
conditions at para 6.1, distributor has to make the payments at mutually
agreed intervals during the year and the final payment to be on the basis of
duly audited accounts. Further as per clause 1 of the said terms & conditions,
the payment is on the percentage agreed upon on the basis of the books of
accounts of the distributor maintained in accordance with the Accounting
Standards. In view of the above aspects, if the corporate veil is lifted and
transactions are examined, it is clear that the contention of the assessee
that liability to deduct tax at source would arise in the year of payment is
contrary to the scheme of the Act and also to the agreements entered into by
Google India with Google Ireland. In view of the above, the non-payment to
Google Ireland by Google India utmost would be deferment of payment in view of
the close relationship and will not have any bearing on the taxability in the
year of accrual.

64\. With regard to incidental use of trademark, the ld. Standing counsel has
contended that the assessee has acquired a right under distribution agreement
to sell the space in the search engine which is an IPR including the
trademark. The assessee is using the distribution agreement coupled with IPR
as tool of the trade and hence payment towards use of trademark is also in the
nature of royalty and liable to tax under the Act as well as the DTAA.

65\. With regard to judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of
Sheraton International 313 ITR 267, Formula One World Championship (2016) 76
taxmann.com IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 78 of 331 6
(Del) and the other judgments referred to by the assessee, the ld. Standing
counsel has submitted that in those cases the main services provided was for
the advertisement and no licence to use the IPR was involved, whereas in the
present case, the use of IPR is involved. Therefore, the Hon'ble Court has
held that use of trademark was incidental to the main purpose of the agreement
which was referred to as advertisement, publicity and sales promotion, whereas
in the instant case, the assessee was selling the Adword space to the
advertisers with the use of IPRs for the said purpose.

66\. With regard to equalization levy, the ld. Standing counsel has submitted
that section 164 and 165 are introduced by Finance Act, 2016. The Parliament
has proposed the equalization levy on the amount to be paid to the non-
resident on digital advertising space and the same has to be considered as
business income. First of all, the amendments are not applicable for the AY
2013-14 as the same are prospective. The equalization levy does not determine
the classification of payment between royalty and business income.
Equalisation levy is only a charge on the payment made towards digital
advertisement space by the advertisers.

67\. With regard to the affidavit filed by the assessee explaining the
functioning of the Google Adword program, the ld. Standing counsel has
submitted that it is mere repetition of the statements made before the lower
authorities. The assessee has not come out with a specific functioning of the
Google Adword program. Therefore, the functioning of IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 79 of 331 Google Adword program can be
ascertained from the relevant material placed during the course of hearing of
these appeals.

68\. The ld. Standing counsel further contended that in the light of the
detailed evidence on record, the nature of payment under the distribution
agreement and the service agreement is a royalty and the AO has rightly held
the assessee to be in default on non-deduction of tax on such payments.

69\. With regard to the contentions of the bonafide belief for non-deduction
of TDS, the learned Standing Counsel has contended that the assessee has
divided the entire AdWord Program into two agreements 1) Distributor Agreement
and 2) Service Agreement, knowing fully well that the payment made under the
AdWord Program on account of use of technology, access to IPRs, intangibles,
derivative works as per the agreement, is a payment of royalty to GIL for
which assessee / appellant is required to deduct the TDS. Therefore, it cannot
be said that appellant was under a bonafide belief that he was not liable to
deduct the TDS on such payment to GIL as it is a business profit in his hands.

70\. In rebuttal, the ld. Counsel for the assessee, Mr. Percy Pardiwalla, has
contended that the contentions of the revenue rather substantiate the
averments of the appellant that nature of receipts are in the hands of non-
resident was business income and in the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 80 of 331 absence of any determination of Permanent Establishment of the
non-resident in India in the order of the AO, there was no question of
applicability of section 195 and consequently section 201 of the Act. For the
AYs 2017-18 and 2018-19, the department has taken a position that equalization
levy is applicable on payments made by the appellant to non-resident for the
purchase of online advertising space. All these views undertaken by the
department reflect the confusion with the department's logic to bring to tax
receipts under dispute to tax in India and are thus devoid of any merit. It
was further contended that Adword is a registered trademark in the name of
Google Inc., the Adword program is an auction based advertising program that
lets advertisers deliver relevant advertisement targeting to such queries on
web content across Google site and through the Google network. To clarify,
Google Adword programmit was contended that there are following 5 parties
involved as far as transaction involving Indian advertisers are concerned:-

> 1\. Google Inc. USA - The program owner of the Adword and legal owner of
> Google web properties like Google search eninge.

> 2\. GIL has got licence to exploit rates in Google web properties and
> commercially exploit Google Adword program globally, except America's
> region.

> 3\. GIPL - The appellant has got distribution rights under distribution
> agreement to sell online advertisement space to advertisers in India.

> 4\. The advertisers and business owner wanting to advertise its product or
> services; and IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
> IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
> 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 81 of 331

> 5\. The viewer/user who views the advertisement while using Google web
> properties like search engine.

71\. The Indian advertiser who enters into contract with the appellant has to
pay the appellant an amount fixed by the advertiser for every click the viewer
makes on its advertisement.

72\. With regard to the judgments of the jurisdictional High Court referred to
by the revenue, the ld. Sr. Consel, Mr. Pardiwalla has contended that use of
software necessarily results in payment of royalty is distinguishable because
in all those cases, what was being examined by the Hon'ble High Court was
taxability of the payment made by *shrinkwrap software and has no relevance or
bearing on the issue at hand. Thus reliance placed on the decision does not
support the case of the revenue. Nowhere the appellant has been granted
licence to use the software. The ld. Counsel reiterated his contentions that
ITES segment was set up in the year 2004 for providing back office support
services which include ad review and review of the advertisement process is
automatic process and the systems itself directs any flagged advertisement for
manual review. There is no human intervention in the selection process as to
where ad will get reviewed since, there are multiple locations providing this
review. These ad review services are provided to GIL not to the advertisers.
The ld. Counsel further contended that the argument of the revenue that right
to modify the ads is not possible without the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 82 of 331 licence to use IPR is clearly baseless
because the whole process of the advertising is that the advertiser chooses
the keywords, form of advertisements, advertising contents that is reflective
of the business to be advertised. Under the terms & conditions of the contract
between the advertisers and the appellant, the advertisers grant all the
intellectual property rights inherent in such advertisement whether a form or
content of the appellant for which no consideration is paid by the appellant
to the advertiser. Be that as it may, it is neither relevant nor determinative
of the issue at hand i.e., payment made by the appellant to GIL.

73\. With regard to the contention of the department that Google India has
right to use Google brand features and therefore the payment made by the
appellant is in the nature of royalty, the ld. Counsel for the assessee has
submitted that the argument of the department is contrary to the precedent set
by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the case of Formula One World
Championship (2016) 76 taxmann.com 6 (Del) and DIT Vs. Sheraton International
Inc. 313 ITR 267 wherein the Hon'ble Delhi High Court has held that use of
intellectual property that is incidental to the main purpose of agreement does
not enable the payment made thereof to qualify under the definition of royalty
under the Act or DTAA. It was further contended that use of Google brand
feature is probably the only intellectual property granted to the appellant
under distribution agreement, however, the same has been granted to the
appellant for the purpose of appellant IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 83 of 331 achieving its obligation under the said agreement. Therefore,
use of Google brand feature under distribution agreement would not render
payment of royalty under the Act or under India-Ireland DTAA in the light of
judgments of Formula One World Championship (supra) and Sheraton International
Inc. (supra).

74\. With regard to contentions of the revenue that GIPL has access to
database of GIL, the ld. Counsel has submitted that the appellant has no
access to database of Google and in support thereof, he placed some documents
to demonstrate that wherever investigating agencies have sought information
regarding user of such products, the appellant has maintained a position of
not being able to comply with such requests as it does not have such access.
It is only GIL or Google Inc. USA which can comply with such requests.
Therefore, the averment of the revenue is completely unsupported and factually
incorrect.

75\. The ld. Counsel for the assessee has also placed reliance upon the
commentaries of The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) and UN model as a guide for interpretation of treaty with the
submission that this OECD commentary has been relied upon on by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court and the various High Courts while deciding a number of cases.
The OECD has set up a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) to examine the issue
arising in characterization of e-commerce payment. TAG has categorizede-
commerce transaction into 28 types including internet IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 84 of 331 advertising. TAG has concluded that
payment arising from the advertisement would constitute business profits
falling under Article 7 rather than royalties. He also further placed reliance
upon the High Power Committee report on 'Electronics, Commerce and Taxation'
constituted by CBDT vide order dated 16.12.1999, wherein and the Committee has
also held that payment arising from the advertisement would constitute profits
and gains from the business or profession.

76\. It was further contended that prior to introduction of equalization levy,
the amounts receivable by non-residents was considered to be business income
and not taxable in India in the absence of Permanent Establishment in India.
Considering the growth of the online advertisement industry and in line with
OECD's Action Plan-1 of the base erosion and proper shifting, the Govt.
introduced equalization levy to tax the receipt which was not subject to tax
in India in the absence of Permanent Establishment. The Memorandum of Finance
Bill, 2016 proposed to insert a new chapter titled 'Equalisation Levy' in the
Finance Bill. 2016 to provide for equalization levy of 6% of the amount of
consideration for specified services received or receivable by the non-
resident not having Permanent Establishment in India from a resident in India
who carries out business or profession or form non-resident having Permanent
Establishment in India.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 85 of 331

77\. The ld. Counsel for the assessee further contended that grant of
distribution right in Adword program does not involve transfer of right in
copyright. The appellant is a mere non-exclusive distributor or reseller of ad
space through the Adword programe in India. The appellant merely purchases the
advertisement space under the Adword program from GIL and distribute the same
to advertisers in India. He quoted an example by saying that for
advertisements in other mediums like newspaper magazine, the customer
approaches an advertisement agency to have the advertisement public in one or
more newspaper. The advertisement agency in turn approaches the respective
newspaper entity or an entity that has bought media space for publishing of
the advertisement of their customers. The consideration paid by the customer
to advertisement agencies is in the nature of advertisement fees and the
consideration paid by the advertisement agencies to the respective newspaper
entity is also in the nature of advertisement fees, inspite of the fact that
the advertisement may be displayed by considerable use of technology.
Similarly, in the instant case, the consideration received by the appellant
from the advertisers in India is in the nature of advertisement fees and
consideration paid by the appellant to Google Ireland for purchase of
advertisement space is also in the nature of advertisement fees, even though
the advertisement would be displayed as a consequence of use of technology.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 86 of 331

78\. It was further contended that Adword program is not a computer program,
but a title givento the facility/services provided by Google to the
advertisers to advertise their products/services by displaying links/contents
on the Google search engine. In fact Adword is a trademark registered by
Google Inc. and not a copyright patent. The AO has placed reliance on the
description of Adword program in Wikipedia and other articles appearing in
worldwide web to hold Adword is complex computer program. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court in various cases has observed that the information on Wikipedia can be
entered by any person, as such it may not be authority and accordingly should
not be relied upon for judicial decisions. Therefore the information available
on Wikipedia should not be taken into account. The present non-exclusive right
to distribute the ad space is a commercial space and not an intellectual
property right, therefore the provisions of IT Enabled Services by the
appellant is independent of the distribution/reseller of advertisement space
under the Adword program by the appellant to advertisers in India. ITES
division of the appellant is a separate outsourcing business segment for which
it earns revenue under a separate outsourcing service agreement with GIL. The
appellant was providing ITES services prior to the commencement of the
distribution or resale activities. Further the amount receivable under the
service agreement is not set off against the amount payable by the company
under the distribution/resale agreement. Role of distribution/reseller
function is limited to IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 87 of 331 distribution/resale activities, whereas ITES performed
functions inter alia are to ensure the advertisement placed by advertiser
globally in conformity with the Google editorial guidelines/local Government
regulations of the country, from where ad is to be displayed. These ad review
services are not provided to the advertisers since the responsibility is of
the appellantthat ads do not violate Government regulation in the web platform
operator i.e., Google Ireland. There is no professional interaction between
the distribution team and the ITES team since these are separate functions
performed independent of each other. In fact they operate from separate
location. ITES division operates out of units situated at Hyderabad and
Gurgaon, whilstthe distribution division operates out of Mumbai and Gurgaon.
It was further contended that even under ITES agreement, only limited rights
to use intellectual property of Google Ireland is granted to the appellant
i.e., to carry out only specific services under the said agreement. Under the
ITES agreement, there are no rights that are granted to Google India for
commercial exploitation of such intellectual property. Under the ITES segment,
providing such limited right to use intellectual property to Google Ireland is
entered in April 1, 2004 which is much before the agreement for Adword program
on 12.12.2005. The ld.

Counsel for the assessee has further quoted example of Indian distributor of
luxury car.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 88 of 331

79\. With regard to the judgments referred to by the revenue, the ld. Counsel
for the assessee has contended that all the judgments are distinguishable on
facts, therefore they cannot be relied on.

80\. The ld. Counsel for the assessee further contended that since the lower
authorities have not examined the issue in the light of various judicial
pronouncements, the order of the CIT(Appeals) deserves to be set aside.

81\. Having carefully examined the orders of lower authorities in the light of
rival submissions and the material available on record, we find that in these
appeals, the sole controversy revolves around an issue as to what is the
nature of payment made by the appellant to Google Ireland Ltd. under the
Google Adworddistribution/reseller agreement. The AO has examined the
distribution/ reseller agreement along with the service agreement executed
between the appellant and GIL in order to arrive at a conclusion with regard
to the nature of payment made by the appellant to GIL. Therefore it has become
necessary for us to adjudicate as to whether the distribution/ reseller
agreement and service agreements are two independent and separable agreements
or they are interconnected and interdependent agreements, without which the
obligation under the distributor agreement cannot be discharged. Therefore we
have to examine both the agreements minutely.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 89 of 331

82\. Undisputedly the service agreement was executed between the appellant and
GIL on 01.04.2004 under which the appellant was required to render ITES
services for GIL.

Under the service agreement, GIL desired to avail services relating to
information technology, information technology enabled services and software
development related services from the appellant as per terms & conditions of
this agreement. Under the head 'Services', the appellant agreed to perform
certain information technology enabled services and software development
services as requested by GIL from time to time with respect to products,
utilizing GIL software technology and other appropriate technology from GIL or
third parties which may be properly used for this purposes.

83\. Under the head 'Ownership', the intellectual property shall be owned by
GIL and Google India acknowledges and agrees that all such confidential
information, intellectual property, software technology and documentation
shall remain the exclusive property of Google Ireland. Similar is the position
with regard to derivative works and software embodiment. The Google India, the
appellant shall keep Google Ireland primarily informed of Google India
developments of any derivative works works and software embodiment and hereby
irrevocably agrees that such determinative networks and software embodiment
shall be the sole and exclusive property of Google Ireland throughout the
world from the date of its creation. From time to time promptly upon receipt
of Google Ireland's request, Google India shall provide Google Ireland with
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 90 of 331 assignments, in
substantiallythe form of Exhibit-B hereto, facilitate Google
Ireland'sperfection of its rights in derivative works works and software
embodiment in its jurisdiction in the world.

84\. It is also noticed from the agreement that under the head 'Confidential
information', during the course of performance of the agreement, Google
Ireland will disclose certain confidential information to Google India, the
appellant, solely to permit the appellant to perform its obligation under this
agreement. Except as otherwise provided in this agreement, Google India agrees
that such confidential information shall be kept secret by Google India during
the term of agreement and Google India shall not disclose or facilitate
disclosure of such confidential information to any person without the prior
consent of Google Ireland. Upon Google Ireland's request or upon termination
of the agreement, all files, loose records, documents, drawings,
specifications, equipment and computer programs which incorporate or refer to
all or portion of the confidential information shall be promptly returned to
Google Ireland. Upon termination of the agreement, Google India shall
discontinue all use of confidential information, derivative works works and
software embodiment, intellectual property and other software technology and
shall have no further rights in respect thereto. The appellant shall
immediately return to Google Ireland or to destroy all copies of confidential
information, derivative works works and software embodiment in its
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 91 of 331 possession or control.
Meaning thereby the appellant has an access to the intellectual properties,
confidential information, derivative works works and software embodiments and
the software technologies of the GIL under the service agreement.

For the sake of reference, we extract the relevant clauses of Services
agreement as under:-

"THIS SERVICES AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is entered into as of 1st April ,2004
(the "Effective Date"), by and between Google Ireland Limited, a corporation
organized under the laws of Ireland (' Ireland") and having its office at
Seagrave House, 19/20 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 02, Ireland, and Google Online
India Private Limited, a company incorporated under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 and having its registered office at Prestige Sigma, 1st
Floor, No. 3 Vittal Mallya Road, Bangalore 560001, India ('Google India') and
having a branch office at RMZ Future, Block A, 4'" Floor Plot No. 14, Road No.
2, Hitec City Layout, Madhapur village, Ranga Reddy District, Hyderabad 500
081, Andhra Pradesh.

A. WHEREAS, Google Ireland is in the business of developing, licensing,
selling, marketing and supporting certain Internet search, advertising system
and information organization and management technology products_and services
to provide information, advertising, search and related services via the
Internet, corporate intranets and private networks (collectively, 'Products");
and B. WHEREAS, Google Ireland desires to avail services, relating to,
information technology. Information technology enabled services and software
development related services from Google India as per the terms and conditions
of this Agreement; and C WHEREAS, Google India has expertise in rendering the
above services and is willing to render such services for Google Ireland as an
independent contractor on the terms and conditions of this Agreement;

NOW. THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and conditions
contained herein. the parties agree as follows:

1\. DEFINITIONS.

1.1 'Affiliate' shall mean any Person, whether de Jure or de facto, that
directly or indirectly participates in the capital, control or management of
either party or is under common ownership with a party to this Agreement or
other entity actually controlled by, controlling, or under common control with
a party to this Agreement.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 92 of 331 1.2 "Confidential
Information' shall mean all data and information of a confidential nature,
Including know-how and trade secrets, relating to the business, the affairs,
the products, the development or other projects or services of Google Ireland
or its-suppliers or its affiliate, including but not limited to Intellectual
Property. Confidential Information may be communicated orally, in writing, or
in any other recorded, electronic or tangible form. Data and information shall
be considered to be Confidential Information if (i) Google Ireland has marked
them as such; (ii) Google Ireland, orally or in writing, has advised Google
India of their confidential nature; or (iii) due to their character or nature,
a reasonable person in a like position and under like circumstances would
treat them as secret and confidential. Confidential Information does not
-include information: (i) that is in the public domain through no fault of the
receiving party, (ii) that was previously known by receiving party, as
established by written records of the receiving party prior to receipt of such
information from the providing party or (iii) that was lawfully obtained by
the receiving party from a third party without any obligations of
confidentiality to Google Ireland.

1.3 "Derivative works Work' shall mean (i) for copyrightable or copyrighted
material, any modification. derivative works work (as defined in 17 U.S.C.
§101), translation, abridgment, revision or other form in which such material
may be recast, transformed or adapted, (ii) for patentable or patented
material, any improvement thereon, and (iii) for material protected by trade
secret, any new material derived from such existing trade secret material,
including new material which may be protected oy copyright, patent and/or
trade secret.

1.4 'Documentation" shall mean any and all information, written or otherwise,
provided by Goode Ireland to Google India describing the Intellectual Property
or the Products and any updated, improved or modified version(s) of such
materials, including information contained in published written materials, on
magnetic media or communicated by electronic means.

1.5 "intellectual Property' shall mean all intellectual, proprietary, and/or
intangible property rights constituting, embodied in, pertaining to, used in
or with respect to the business of Google Ireland, the Products, or the
provision of related services and all tangible embodiments hereof, wherever
located, including but not limited to the following: (i) all trademarks, trade
names, service marks, logos or trade dress, including all registrations and
applications therefor; (ii) all copyrights. Moral Rights (as defined below),
and other rights in works of authorship including all registrations and
applications therefor; (iii) all patents and patent applications. patentable
Ideas, Inventions, innovations and improvements; (iv) all know-how and trade
secrets; v) all design and code documentation, methodologies, processes,
design information, design flows, encoding techniques, applications, product
information, formulae, engineering specifications, technical data, testing
procedures, drawings and techniques and other proprietary information and
materials of any kind; (vi) all software programs in both source code and
object code format, including all testing software and software tools; (vii)
all documentation, records, databases, drafts, designs, codes, drawings and
algorithms; and (viii) all confidential and proprietary information related to
any of (i) through (vii) above. --

...............................

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 93 of 331 1.10 "Software
Embodiments" shall mean all designs, discoveries, inventions, Products,
procedures, improvements, developments, drawings, notes, Documentation,
information, materials, Intellectual Property and Derivative works Works made,
conceived or developed by Google India alone or with others which result from
or relate to the Services 1.11 "Software Technology" shall mean all
Intellectual Property, Confidential Information, Documentation, Derivative
works Works and other technical data used by Google Ireland that are required,
used or appropriate for the design and development of Products, including the
reproduction, use, testing, operation, maintenance and service of such
Products.

.................................

2\. SERVICES 2.1 Request Google India hereby agrees to perform certain
information technology, information technology enabled services and software
development services, as requested by Google Ireland from time to time, with
respect to Products, utilizing Google Ireland Software Technology and other
appropriate technology from Google Ireland or third parties which may be
properly used for these purposes. Google Ireland will specify the information
technology, information technology enabled services and software development
services to be_performed, the Products to be worked on or used, the time line
for completion and the specific results to be achieved (the Services").

2.2 Performance. Upon agreement between Google Ireland and Google India as to
the Services and completion date for a particular Services project, Google
India will perform the Services. Google India agrees to use commercialy
reasonable efforts to perform the Services in a timely fashion and as
described to it by Google Ireland. Google India may not subcontract work under
this Agreement unless specifically and to the extent set forth in the
Services. Google India shall, at all times, be responsible for work done by
its subcontractors within the scope of this Agreement as it is for work done
by its own employees. At the option of Google Ireland, Google India shall make
Goggle Ireland a party to the agreements that Google India may execute with
its subcontractors and Google Ireland shall have the right to pre-approve the
terms and conditions of such agreements.

.........................

5\. OWNERSHIP.

5.1 Intellectual Property. Google India acknowledges the exclusive right,
title and interest of Google Ireland and its licensors and/or suppliers in and
to any and all Confidential Information, Intellectual Property, Software
Technology and Documentation, and Google India will not at any time do or
cause to be done any act or thing impairing or tending to impair any part of
said right, title and interest. Google India acknowledgesand agrees that all
such Confidential Information, Intellectual Property, Software Technology and
Documentation shall remain the exclusive property of Google Ireland and, as
applicable, its licensors and/or suppliers.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 94 of 331 5.2 Ownership of
Derivative works Works and Software Embodiments. Google India shall keep
Google Ireland promptly informed of Google India's development of any
Derivative works Works and Software Embodiments and hereby irrevocably agrees
that all such Derivative works Works and Software Embodiments shall forever be
the sole and exclusive property of Google Ireland throughout the world from
the date of its creation. As between Google Ireland and Google India no
additional action shall be required to vest all right, title and ownership of
such Derivative works Works and Software Embodiments in Google Ireland. Google
India shall furnish to Google Ireland all such Derivative works Works and
Software Embodiments developed by Google India as soon as they become
available. From time to-time, promptly upon receipt of Google Ireland's
request, Google India shall provide Google Ireland with assignments, in
substantially the form of Exhibit B hereto to facilitate Google Ireland's
perfection of its rights in the Derivative works Works and the Software
Embodiments in any jurisdiction in the world. Google India shall also promptly
make available to Google Ireland all Residuals. If Google India has any rights
to Derivative works Works or Software Embodiments that cannot be assigned to
Google Ireland under law, Google India hereby waives the enforcement of such
rights; and if Google India has any rights which cannot be assigned or waived
under law, Google India hereby grants to Google Ireland an exclusive,
irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide, transferable, fully paid licence, with
rights to sub licen.se and assign, to all such rights. Google India shall
enter into agreements with its Representatives sufficient to permit Google
India to make the foregoing grant of rights.

....................

6\. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.

6.1 Access and Use of Confidential Information. During the course of
performance of this Agreement, Google Ireland will disclose certain
Confidential Information to Google India solely to permit Google India to
perform its obligations under this Agreement. Except as otherwise provided in
this Agreement, Google India agrees that such Confidential Information shall
be kept secret by Google India during the term of this agreement and after the
expiration hereof. Google India shall refrain from using or exploiting any and
all Confidential Information for any purposes or activities other than those
contemplated in this Agreement.

6.2 Agreement Not to Disclose Confidential Information. Google India shall not
disclose or facilitate disclosure of such Confidential Information to any
Person without the prior consent of Google Ireland, except to its
Representatives, and then only to the extent necessary for the performance of
the activities contemplated by this Agreement. Google India shall cause each
of its Representatives with access to the Confidential Information to enter
into a nondisclosure agreement in a form approved by Google Ireland. Google
India shall use the highest standard of care currently employed by any
developer or distributor of high technology products in order to avoid
disclosure or misappropriation of such Confidential Information.

6.3 Ownership and Return of Confidential Information. All files, lists,
records. documents, drawings, specifications, equipment and computer programs
which incorporate or refer to all or a portion of the Confidential Information
shall remain the sole property of Google Ireland or its licensors and
suppliers. Such materials shall be promptly returned: (i) upon Google
Ireland's IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 95 of 331
reasonable request, or (ii) in accordance with Section 12 upon termination of
this Agreement, whichever is earlier.

...............................

...............................

12.5 Rights and Duties on Termination.

(a) Upon termination or expiration of this Agreement.

(i) Google India shall have the right to retain any sums already paid by
Google Ireland under this Agreement and Google Ireland shall pay all sums
accrued, but not yet paid, that are due under this Agreement as of the date of
such termination;

(ii) Google India shall discontinue all use of the Confidential Information,
Documentation, Intellectual Property and other Software Technology and shall
have no further right with respect thereto.

(iii) Google India shall (except as specified in subsection (b) below)
immediately return to Google Ireland or (at Google Ireland's request) destroy,
all copies of the Confidential Information, Documentation and other Software
Embodiments, in its possession or control. Google India hereby expressly
waives and agrees not to assert any right of detention whatsoever with respect
to the foregoing."

85\. The amended and restated Google Adword program distribution agreement was
executed on 12.12.2005 between the appellant and Google Ireland through which
the appellant was appointed as a Adword Program distributor. This distributor
agreement was further renewed under different title of agreement i.e., Google
Reseller agreement on 01.07.2012. Though nomenclature of agreement is changed,
but the functions and obligations of the appellant almost remain the same. In
distributor agreement the appellant was called as a 'distributor', and in
reseller agreement the appellant was called IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 96 of 331 a 'reseller'. Besides change of nomenclature,
the obligation upon the appellant remained the same. Therefore we discuss the
clauses of distribution agreement in order to understand the Google Adword
program and duties and obligations cast upon the appellant in discharge of its
functions. In this distribution agreement, a reference was made that the GIL
and distributor desire to terminate the prior agreement and further desired
that this agreement supersedes and replace the prior agreement in its
entirety.

But before us, a copy of the prior agreement which was superseded by this
agreement has not been filed. But this fact is clear that before this
agreement, there was some other agreement under which the appellant was
performing certain functions. Through this agreement, the appellant was
appointed as non-exclusive authorized distributor of Google Adword program to
advertisers in accordance with the terms & conditions set forth in this
agreement. It has been clarified that distributor shall conduct its business
for its own account, in its own name, and not as an agent, employee, partner
or franchisee of Google i.e., Google Ireland. It was also made clear that
distributor may not solicit business from and shall not distribute Adword
program to (even if unsolicited) any entity that does not have a principal
place of business within the territory, meaning thereby the appellant was
appointed as distributor of Google Adword program to conduct its business
relating to the said Google Adword program within the territory of India
within the broad guidelines provided by Google with its reasonable commercial
expertise, sale IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 97 of 331
force and customer service infrastructure. Distributor shall perform its
obligation hereunder in a professional and workman-like manner consistent with
reasonably applicable industry standards and in accordance with this
agreement. Distributor will distribute Adword program in accordance with the
training provided by Google (GIL).

Further, as per clause 2.3 under the head 'Adword program Sign up process',
distributor shall be responsible for uploading of advertisers information that
is required by Google for participation in the Adword program. Under clause
2.5 distributor or the appellant shall conduct the business in a manner that
reflects favourably at all times on the Adword program and on Google's
goodwill and reputation and agrees to adhere to minimum levels of service as
specified in Exhibit-C and breach of this section will constitute material
breach of this agreement. Under clause 2.6, distributor will provide after
sales service to advertisers in accordance with the broad instructions,
training and standards of Google.

86\. Under the head 'Google obligations', Google agrees to provide advertising
space through Adword program for distribution by distributor to advertisers as
set forth herein. GIL has also agreed to train the distributor. Under the head
'Reporting requirements', Google will make available to distributors online
information about advertisers activity on aggregate and individual basis which
information shall contain include:-

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 98 of 331

> 1\. Total number of keywords purchased by advertisers

> 2\. Number of impressions of advertisersadvertisements delivered across
> Google network.

> 3\. Number of clicks delivered at Google network for
> advertisers/advertisements.

> 4\. Cost of click delivered across Google network for
> advertiser'sadvertisements.

87\. The distributor must set up Adword program advertisement accounts in
order to receive such online information. Google reserves the right, but has
no obligation to send the report about advertisers activity directly to such
advertiser. If the advertiser makes a request to distributor to receive user
name and password to access such advertisers individual Adword program account
activity, distributor will grant such request after approval from Google.
Under the head 'Brand feature', Google grants to distributor or the appellant
non-exclusive and non-sublicensable licence during the term to display google
brand features solely for the purpose of distributor's marketing and
distributing Google Adword program under the terms and subject to the
conditions set forth in this agreement. It is also made clear that distributor
will submit all material of any kind containing the brand features of Google
for written approval prior to release to the public.

Furthermore, distributor agrees to adhere to Google's then-current Brand
features use guidelines and any content referenced or included therein.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 99 of 331

88\. Under the head 'Confidentiality', disclosure of confidential information
or proprietary information disclosed herein include the user data (including
any aggregated user data), the existence and content of this agreement and any
information provided pursuant to this agreement shall be governed by Google
Standard Mutual Non-

Disclosure agreement executed by the parties prior to or concurrently with
this agreement, according to which, each party acknowledges and agrees that it
will obtain the other party's prior written approval which shall include
approval of any proposed text, before making any public announcement or
communication, including, but not limited to any press release, online
publishing or direct mailings concerning or related to the existence or terms
of this agreement. It has been clarified that Google owns all right, title and
interest in and to all information and data, including the user data collected
by Google relating to advertisers in connection with the provisions of the
Adword program. Distributor shall maintain all user data in accordance with
the local law and regulation applicable to such data and shall implement
policies and procedures with respect to user data, that are atleast as
protective of the rights of the advertisers as is provided in the Google
privacy policy set forth and all relevant policies implied therein.

Upon termination or expiration of this agreement, all rights and licence
granted by one party to other including but not limited to rights to use the
other party's brand features shall cease immediately and each party shall
promptly return to the other party or destroy IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 100 of 331 and certify the destruction of all
confidential information as defined in the non-disclosure agreement and
section 7 of this agreement of the other party. As per the terms & conditions,
the distributor will make payment at mutually agreed intervals during the year
and make the final trued-up payment on the basis of duly audited accounts to
Google.

89\. As per service level agreement which is Exhibit C to this agreement, the
distributor shall be solely responsible for providing all customer service to
advertisers according to the procedures and in compliance with the standards
provided by Google. All advertisers shall be instructed by the distributor to
contact distributor directly for support and not to communicate directly with
Google (GIL). The distributor agrees that it shall provide atleast certain
minimum level of services. As per the non-

disclosure agreement, which is a part of distribution agreement, the party may
disclose certain information, which it considers confidential and proprietary
(confidential information) to other party including, but not limited to
tangible, intangible, visual, electronics, present or future information such
as:

(a) trade secret,

(b) financial information including pricing, IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 101 of 331

(c) technical information including research, development, procedure,
algorithms, data, design and know-how,

(d) business information including operations, planning, marketing, interests
and products;

(e) the terms of any agreement entered into between the parties and the
discussions, negotiations and proposals related thereto; and

(f) information acquired during any facilities tours.

90\. It was further contended that the party receiving confidential
information (a recipient) will only have a duty to protect confidential
information disclosed to it by the other party. It was also further agreed
that the recipient will use the confidential information only for the purpose
described above i.e., business. The recipient will use the same degree of
care, but no less than a reasonable degree of care, as the recipient uses with
respect to its own information of a similar nature to protect the confidential
information.

91\. So far as the intellectual property rights are concerned, no party
acquires any intellectual property rights under this agreement, except the
limited rights necessary to carry out the purpose as specified under this
agreement. This agreement is available in IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 102 of 331 the Paper book filed by the assessee at
pages 185 to 199and the relevant clauses are extracted hereunder for the sake
of reference:-

"Amended and Restated Google AdWords Program Distribution Agreement This
Amended and Restated Google AdWords Program Distribution Agreement
("Agreement") is entered into as of December 12, 2005 (the "Effective Date")
by and between Google Ireland Limited, with offices at 1st & 2nd Floors Gordon
House, Barrow Street, Dublin 4 Ireland ("Google"),and Google Online India
Private Limited, a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1956
and having its registered office at 1st Floor, Prestige Sigma, No. 3 Vittal
Mallya Road, Bangalore 560 001 ("Distributor").

WHEREAS

1\. Google wishes to enter into the Distribution Agreement for its AdWords
Program with Distributor;

2\. Whereas Google Inc., a Delaware corporation, and Distributor entered into
a Google AdWords Program Distribution Agreement, dated as of December 12,
2005.(the "Prior Agreement"), and Google Inc. assigned its rights and
obligations under the Prior Agreement to Google; and

3\. Google and Distributor desire to terminate the Prior Agreement and further
desire that this Agreement supersede and replace the Prior Agreement in its
entirety;

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the promises and the mutual covenants,
agreements, representations and warranties hereinafter set forth, Google and
Distributor hereby agree as follows

1\. Definitions. The following capitalized terms shall have the meanings set
forth below.

1.1 "Advertiser" means an individual or business resident or having its
principal place of business located within the Territory (as defined herein),
where principal place of business is determined by the place of an entity's
registration.

1.2 "AdWords Program" means the advertising program currently offered by
Google under the name "AdWords.' IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 103 of 331 1.3 "Brand_features" means the trade names, trademarks,
service marks, logos, domain names, and other distinctive brand features of
each party, respectively, as secured by such party from time to time.

1.4 "Designated Contact" means those contacts designated by each party as the
point of contact or contacts for a particular function area related to this
Agreement.

1.5 "Google Brand Features" means the Google trade names, trademarks, service
marks, logos, domain names, and other distinctive brand features, with some
but not all examples at "http://www.google.com/permissions/trademarks.html"
(or such other URL that Google may provide from time to time), and such other
trade names, trademarks, service marks, logos, domain names, or other
distinctive brand features that Google may provide to Distributor for use
solely under this Agreement.

1.6 "Intellectual Property Rights" shall mean any and all rights existing from
time to time under patent law, copyright law, semiconductor chip protection
law, moral rights law, trade secret law, trademark law, unfair competition
law, publicity rights law, privacy rights law, and any and all other
proprietary rights, as well as, any and all applications, renewals,
extensions, restorations and re-instatements thereof, now or hereafter in
force and effect worldwide.

1.7 "Keywords" means words chosen by an advertiser through the AdWords Program
for a given set of one or more advertisements that are used to target those
advertisements to potential customers.

1.10 "User Data" means all data and information provided by users via the
AdWords Program, including all registration data, names, email addresses,
other addresses, contact information, and other identifying information.

2\. Appointment of Territory and Distributor Obligations.

2.1 Appointment of Territory. Google appoints Distributor as a non-exclusive
authorized Distributor of Google AdWords Program to Advertisers, all under and
in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement.
Distributor shall conduct its business for its own account, in its own name,
aid not as an agent, employee, partner, or franchisee of Google. Distributor
may not solicit business from and shall not distribute AdWords Program to
(even if unsolicited), any entity that does not have a principal place of
business within the Territory. For the avoidance of doubt, an entity's
principal place of business will be determined by the place of such entity's
registration. All inquiries by any such entity for sale of IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 104 of 331 advertising space shall be referred
to the designated Google contact within three (3) business days of receipt by
Distributor of such inquiry.

2.2 Distribution & Marketing of AdWords Program. Distributor agrees to market
and distribute AdWords Program to Advertisers in the designated Territory,
within the broad guidelines provided by Google, with its reasonable commercial
expertise and own sales force and customer service infrastructure. Distributor
shall not subcontract any of its functions or obligations under this Agreement
to any third parties. Distributor shall perform its obligations hereunder in a
professional and workmanlike manner consistent with reasonably applicable
industry standards and in accordance with this Agreement. Distributor will
distribute AdWords Program in accordance with the training provided by Google.
Failure to do so would constitute a material breach of this Agreement and
shall be grounds for termination under section 9.3.

2.3 AdWords Program Sign Up Process. Distributor shall be responsible for
uploading all Advertiser information that is required by Google for
participation in the AdWords Program.

2.4 Licences; Approvals. Distributor shall be responsible for obtaining all
licences and permits and for satisfying all formalities as may be required to
enter into this Agreement and to perform its obligations in accordance with
then-prevailing laws and regulations, including without limitation those
necessary to enable Distributor to make payments to Google in U.S. dollars.
Distributor will promptly secure all governmental approvals as may be required
in the Territory or performance of its obligations under this Agreement.

2.5 Compliance with United States and Other Applicable Law; Conduct of
Business. Distributor will comply with all United States and local laws and
regulations applicable to the distributor of the goods and services, including
but not limited to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and U.S. regulations of
international boycotts. Distributor shall (a) conduct business in a manner
that reflects favorably at all times on the AdWords Program and on Google's
goodwill and reputation, and

(b) agrees to adhere to the minimum levels of service as specified in Exhibit
C. Breach of this Section 2.5 will constitute a material breach of this
Agreement.

2.6 After-Sales Support. Distributor will provide after-sales services to
Advertisers in accordance with the broad instructions, training and standards
of Google.

3\. Google Obligations.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 105 of 331 3.1 Advertising
Space. Google agrees to provide advertising space through the AdWords Prograrn
for distribution by Distributor to Advertisers as set forth herein.

3.2 Training. Google agrees to train Distributor.

3.3 Non-Exclusivity. This Agreement shall constitute a non-exclusive
relationship between Google and Distributor.

................

5\. Reporting Requirements.

5.1 Information Provided by Google. Google will make available to Distributor
online information about Advertiser activity, on an aggregate and individual
basis, which information shall contain include (i) the total number of
Keywords purchased by Advertisers, (ii) the number of impressions of
Advertisers' advertisement delivered across the Google network, (iii) the
number of clicks delivered across the Google network for Advertisers'
advertisement an (iv) the cost of clicks delivered across the Google network
for Advertisers' advertisement. Distributor must set up AdWords Program
advertising accounts in order to receive such online information. Google
reserves the right, but has no obligation, to send reports about an
Advertiser's activity directly to such Advertiser. If an Advertiser makes a
request to Distributor to receive a user name and password to access such
Advertisers individual AdWords Program account activity, Distributor' will
grant such request after approval from Google.

............................

6\. Brand features. Each party shall own all right, title and interest,
including without limitation all Intellectual Property Rights, relating to its
Brand Features. Google grants to Distributor nonexclusive and nonsublicensable
licence during the Term to display Google Brand Features solely for the
purpose of Distributor's marketing and distribution of AdWords Program under
the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Distributor will submit all materials of any
kind containing the Brand Feature(s) to Google for written approval prior to
release to the public. Furthermore, Distributor agrees to adhere to Google's
then-current Brand Features use guidelines, and any content referenced or
included therein, which may be found at the following URL:
http://www.google.com/permissions/guidelines.html (or such other URL that
Google may provide from time to time) and to such other guidelines or
restrictions provided IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 106 of 331 by Google in writing to Distributor in connection herewith.
Except as set forth in this Agreement, Distributor shall not acquire any
right, title orinterest in or to the Google Brand Features. All use by Google
of Distributor Brand features (including any goodwill associated therewith
shall inure to the benefit of Distributor and all use by Distributor of Google
Brand Features (including any goodwill associated therewith) shall inure to
the benefit of Google. No party shall challenge or assist others to challenge
the Brand Features of the other party (except to protect such party's rights
with respect to its own Brand Features) or the registration thereof by the
other party, nor shall either party attempt to register any Brand Features or
domain names that are confusingly similar to those of the other party.

7\. Confidentiality; Limitation on Public Announcements. Disclosure of
confidential and/or proprietary information disclosed hereunder, including the
User Data (including any aggregated User Data), the existence and content of
this Agreement, and any information provided pursuant to this Agreement, shall
be governed by the Google Standard Mutual Non-Disclosure Agreement
(introductory paragraph and Sections 1 through 12, inclusive), executed by the
parties prior to or concurrently with this Agreement (the "NDA"), which is
attached hereto as Exhibit B, and which is incorporated by reference herein.
Each party acknowledges and agrees that it will obtain the other party's prior
written approval, which shall include approval of any proposed text, before
making any public announcements or communication, including, but not limited
to, any press releases, online publishing or direct mailings concerning or
related lo the existence or terms of this Agreement. In addition, Distributor
agrees to waive all claims against and release Google (and its affiliates,
partners and representatives) from any claims or losses in connection with any
above publications made by Google.

8\. User Data. Google owns all right, title, and interest in and to all
information and data, including the User Data, collected by Google relating to
Advertisers in connection with the provision of the AdWords Program.
Distributor shall maintain all User Data in accordance with local law and
regulation applicable to such data, and shall implement policies and
procedures with respect to the User Data that are at least as protective of
the rights of the Advertisers as is provided in the Google Privacy Policy set
forth at http://wwvv.qoogle.com/privacy.html and all relevant policies implied
therein.

..............

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 107 of 331 9.4 Effect of
Termination. Upon any termination or expiration of this Agreement,

(i) all rights and licences granted by one party to the other, including but
not limited to rights to use the other party's Brand Features shall cease
immediately, (ii) each party shall promptly return to the other party, or
destroy and certify the destruction of all Confidential Information as defined
in the NDA and Section 7 of this Agreement) of the other party, and (iii)
except for a termination pursuant to Section 9.2 or Section 9.3 above, Google
will continue to serve advertisements as provided in this Agreement up to the
earlier date to occur of (x) the date that the services provided by Google
exhaust any amounts prepaid by Distributor, or (y) the date that is thirty
(30) days after expiration or termination of the Agreement. Termination or
expiration of this Agreement, in part or in whole, shall not limit either
party from pursuing other remedies available to it, nor shall Distributor be
relieved of its obligation to pay all charges that have accrued or are
otherwise owed under this Agreement. Termination of this Agreement does not
prevent Distributor from participating in the AdWords Program pursuant to the
general terms and conditions made publicly available by Google from time to
time in its sole discretion.

.......................

EXHBIT C Service Level Agreement Distributor shall be solely responsible for
providing all customer services to Advertisers, according to the procedures,
and in compliance with standards, provided by Google. All Advertisers shall be
instructed by Distributor to contact Distributor directly for support, and not
to communicate directly with Google.

Distributor agrees that it shall provide at least the following minimum levels
of service: Business hours phone support to all Advertisers.

E-mail queries from Advertisers shall be responded to within one (1) business
day with immediate resolution of any issues when possible.

Issues that cannot immediately be resolved by Distributor based on training
and procedures provided under the Agreement must be communicated promptly to
Google by Distributor, and Google will assist Distributor in determining the
best solution.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 108 of 331 Google agrees that it
shall provide at least the following minimum levels of service to Distributor:

Customer Queries (as defined below), up to the E-Mail Escalation Limit (as
defined below), shall be responded to within one (1) business day "Customer
Queries" shall mean e-mails sent from Distributor to Google related to
Advertiser issues, but excluding general communications between Distributor
and Google (e.g. billing questions, training information) and technical issues
that only Google can solve.

"E-Mail Escalation Limit"' shall equal five (5) e-mails per month for every
one hundred (100) Advertisers serviced by Distributor, provided, however that
the E- Mail Escalation Limit shall only apply beginning thirty (30) days after
the completion of tile training.

Timing for responses to Customer Queries from Distributor beyond the E-Mail
Escalation Limit shall be at Google's sole discretion.

Distributor agrees that Google will have the right, to review samples of
communications sent to Advertisers to assess the quality of responses and
modify communications accordingly. Google shall also have the right to send
questionnaires to Distributor's customers to ensure that Distributor is
providing an adequate level of service.

Mutual Non-Disclosure Agreement This Mutual Non-Disclosure Agreement
("Agreement") is made and entered into between Google Ireland Limited, for
itself and its subsidiaries and affiliates ("Google"), and "Participant'
identified below, individually referred to as a "Party" and collectively
referred to as the "Parties". The Parties wish to exchange Confidential
Information (as defined below in Section 2) for the following purpose(s): a)
to evaluate whether to enter into a contemplated business transaction; and b)
if the Parties enter into an agreement related to such business transaction,
to fulfill each Party's confidentiality obligations to the extent the terms
set forth below are incorporated therein (the "Purpose"). The Parties have
entered into this Agreement to protect the confidentiality of information in
accordance with the following terms:

1\. The Effective Date of this Agreement is December 12, 2005.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 109 of 331

2\. In connection with the Purpose, a Party may disclose certain information
it considers confidential and/or proprietary ("Confidential Information") to
the other Party including, but not limited to, tangible, intangible, visual,
electronic, present, or future information such as: (a) trade secrets; (b)
financial information, including pricing; (c) technical information, including
research, development, procedures, algorithms, data, designs, and know-how;
(d) business information, including operations, planning, marketing interests,
and products; (e) the terms of any agreement entered into between the Parties
and the discussions, negotiations and proposals related thereto; and (f)
information acquired during any facilities tours.

3\. The Party receiving Confidential Information (a "Recipient") will only
have ' a duty to protect Confidential Information disclosed to it by the other
Party ("Discloser"): (a) if it is clearly and conspicuously marked as
"confidential" or with a similar designation; (b) if it is identified by the
Discloser as confidential and/or proprietary before, during, or promptly after
presentation or communication; or (c) if it is disclosed in a manner in which
the Discloser reasonably communicated, or the Recipient should reasonably have
understood under the circumstances, including without limitation those
described in Section 2 above, that the disclosure should be treated as
confidential, whether or not the specific designation "confidential" or any
similar designation is used.

4\. A Recipient will use the Confidential Information only for the Purpose
described above. A Recipient will use the same degree of care, but no less
than a reasonable degree of care, as the Recipient uses with respect to its
own information of a similar nature to protect the Confidential Information
and to prevent: (a) any use of Confidential Information in violation of this
agreement; and/or (b) communication of Confidential Information to any
unauthorized third parties. Confidential Information may only be disseminated
to employees, directors, agents or third party contractors of Recipient with a
need to know and who have first signed an agreement with either of the Parties
containing confidentiality provisions substantially similar to those set forth
herein.

.................

6\. This Agreement imposes no obligation upon a Recipient with respect to
Confidential Information that: (a) was known to the Recipient before receipt
from the Discloser; (b) is or becomes publicly available through no fault of
the Recipient;

(c) is rightfully received by the Recipient from a third party without a duty
of confidentiality; (d) is independently developed by the Recipient without a
breach of IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 110 of 331
this Agreement; (e) is disclosed by the Recipient with the Discloser's prior
written approval; or (f) is required to be disclosed by operation of law,
court order or other governmental demand ("Process"); provided that (i) the
Recipient shall immediately notify the Discloser of such Process; and (ii) the
Recipient shall not produce or disclose Confidential Information in response
to the Process unless the Discloser has: (a) requested protection from the
legal or governmental authority requiring the Process and such request has
been denied, (b) consented in writing to the production or disclosure of the
Confidential Information in response to the Process, or (c) taken no action to
protect its interest in the Confidential Information within 14 business days
after receipt of notice from the Recipient of its obligation to produce or
disclose confidential information in response to the Process.

...............................

11\. No Party acquires any intellectual property rights under II Agreement
(including, but not limited to, patent, copyright, and trademark rights)
except the limited rights necessary to carry out the Purpose as forth in this
Agreement.

12\. Each Party acknowledges that damages for improper disclosure Confidential
Information may be irreparable; therefore, the injured Party is entitled to
seek equitable relief, including injunction and preliminary injunction, in
addition to all other remedies available to it.

92\. While providing advertisement space to the customers or advertisers, the
appellant has entered into agreement with the advertisers, which is called a
Google Advertising Agreement and in this agreement, the appellant has been
termed as Google and as per this agreement, Google may decide at any time, in
its sole discretion to change, suspend or discontinue all or any aspect of its
advertising program, including their availability and shall notify the
customer material changes or discontinuation. Google shall have no liability
for such decision. As per the terms of payment, if Google or the appellant at
any time feels itself insecure with respect to customers/advertisers ability
to meet its IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 111 of 331
financial obligations under this Adword agreement (SA), Google shall have the
right to require prepayment of total amount due for the SA in advance of the
target start date or otherwise requested by Google. The customer/advertiser
must remit all payment under this SA agreement by the due date indicated in
the invoice and in the event of non-

payment, Google reserves the right to immediately terminate this SA upon
written notice to customers and immediately suspend the entire customer
account. This Google advertising agreement is available in revenue's paperbook
at pages 1 to 6. The relevant clauses of this agreement are also extracted
hereunder for the sake of reference:-

"This Adwords Agreement ('SA') shall be governed by terms and conditions
('Terms and Conditions) available at the following URL:

http:l/www.google.co.in/ads/adwordsterms.html All terms contained in the Terms
and Conditions are made a part of this SA through incorporation by reference.
The signatory of this Service Agreement represents that she has read and
agrees to such Terms and Conditions and the terms of SA. There shall be no
force or effect to any different or additional terms of any related SA,
purchase order or sales document.

Google may decide at any lime, in its sole discretion, to change, suspend or
discontinue all or any aspect of its advertising programs, including their
availability, and shall notify Customer of material changes and
discontinuations. Google shall have no liability for such decision.

By signing below, Customer represents and warrants that all client
information, including but not limited to credit card information and
invoicing information, provided herein is complete and accurate and that no
additional information is necessary for payment of Google invoices.

Customer's campaign(s) may go live upon posting, at which time Google shall
send Customer an email notifying customer it has 72 hours to modify Customers
campaign keywords and settings as posted. During those 72 hours, Google is
only IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 112 of 331
liable to Customer for keywords or settings discrepancies if Customer can
certify to Google by its contemporaneous documental (evidence that Google
posted keywords or settings other than those requested by Customer. The
account (as modified by Customer, or if unmodified, as initially posted) will
be deemed approved by Customer 72 hours after it initially posts.

Terms of Payment. If Google, at any time, deems itself insecure with respect
to Customer's ability to meet its financial obligations under this SA, Google
shall have the right to require pre-payment of the total amount due for the SA
in advance of the Target Start Date or as otherwise requested by Google.
Customer must remit all payments under this SA to Google by the due date
indicated on the Invoice(s). In the event of nonpayment, Google reserves the
right to immediately terminate this SA upon written notice to Customer and
immediately suspend the entire Customer account. Late payments are subject to
interest payments as set forth in the Terms and Conditions.

Methods of Billing:

Monthly Invoicing: Customer will be billed at the end of the month, based on
the actual number of clicks or other billing methods Customer may choose to
participate in as described in the FAQ (e.g. cost per impression programs).
Customer's credit must first be approved by Google in order for this billing
method to apply.

Prepayment: Customer will pay the total agreement budget prior to any campaign
launch. Acceptance and terms of prepayment are at Google's sole discretion.
Prepayment does not obligate Google to deliver any Ad Words ads
notwithstanding acceptance of prepayment by Google. Unused portions of
prepayments will be returned to Customer after the end date to the extent that
there are no amounts still due to Google.

Right To Reject Advertisement: All advertisements submitted by Customer are
subject to Google's approval. Google reserves the right to review, reject or
remove any SA, advertisement, or URL link, except that Google will not cancel
placement of an SA, advertisement, or URL link due to inventory demand for
other advertisers. Customer pre-authorises Goo gle to modify or rearrange the
text elements in advertising creative submitted by Customer."

Google India Private Limited Advertising Program Terms IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 113 of 331

2\. The Program. Customer is solely responsible for all: (a) ad targeting
options and keywords (collectively "Targets") and all ad content, ad
information, and ad URLs ("Creative"), whether generated by or for Customer;
and (b) web sites, services and landing pages which Creative links or directs
viewers to, and advertised services and products (collectively "Services").
Customer shall protect any Customer passwords and takes full responsibility
for Customer's own, and third party, use of any Customer accounts. Ads maybe
placed on (y) any content or property provided by Google ("Google Property"),
and unless opted-out by Customer (z) any other content or property provided by
a third party ("Partner") upon which Google places ads ("Partner Property").
With respect to Adwords online auction-based advertising, Google may send
Customer an email notifying Customer it has 72 hours ("Modification Period")
to modify keywords and settings as posted. The account (as modified by
Customer otherwise as initially posted) is deemed approved by Customer after
the Modification Period, and Google is_only liable to Customer for
discrepancies if Customer can certify by contemporaneous documentary evidence
that Google posted ads not approved by Customer. With respect to all other
advertising, Customer must provide Google with all relevant Creative by the
due date set forth in that advertising Program's applicable FAQ or otherwise
communicated by Google. Customer grants Google permission to utilize an
automated software program to retrieve and analyze websites associated with
the Services for ad quality and serving purposes, unless Customer specifically
opts out of the/ evaluation in a manner specified by Google. Google or
Partners may reject or remove any ad or Target any time for any or no reason.
Google may modify the Program or these Terms at any time without liability and
your use of the Program after notice that Terms have changed indicates
acceptance of the Terms.

..............................

..............................

4 Prohibited Uses; Licence Grant; Representations and Warranties. Customer
shall not, and shall not authorize any party to: (a) generate automated,
fraudulent or otherwise invalid impressions, inquiries, conversions, clicks or
other actions; (b) use any automated means or form of scraping or data
extraction to access, query or otherwise collect Google advertising related
information from any Adwords website or property except as expressly permitted
by Google; or (c) advertise anything illegal or engage in any illegal or
fraudulent business practice. Customer represents and warrants that it holds
and hereby grants Google and Partners all rights (including without limitation
any copyright, trademark, patent, publicity or other IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 114 of 331 rights) in -Creative Services and
Targets needed for Google and Partner to operate Google's advertising programs
for Customer (including without limitation any rights needed to host, cache,
route, transmit, store, copy, modify, Perform. display, reformat, excerpt,
analyze, and create algorithms from and derivative works works of Creative or
Targets) in connection with this Agreement ("Use"). Customer represents and
warrants that (y) all Customer information is complete, correct and current;
and (z) any use hereunder and Customer's Creative, Targets, and Customers's
Services will not violate or encourage violation of any applicable laws,
regulations, code of conduct, or third party rights (including, without
limitation, intellectual property rights). Violation of the foregoing may
result in immediate termination of this Agreement or customer's account
without notice and may subject Customer to legal penalties and consequences."

93\. We have also examined the statement of Shri Arijit Sarker, Director,
India Operation, Head of Information Technology Enabled Services, GIPL, and he
explains the functions of outsource ad reviews by stating that advertisers
upload the ads which resides in data servers outside of India and these ads
are reviewed in accordance with Google policies. 94% of these ads are
automatically reviewed by the system, 6% of ad comes from manual review which
is done through proprietary web application (approval bin) by the ad review
team. Here the dispute is raised with regard to the 6% of ads which comes for
the manual review to the appellant. The ad review team consists of 100 Google
employees and 200 vendor employees, they are graduates from various colleges
in India.

94\. In reply dated 15.02.2013 available at pages 56 to 61 of revenue's
compilation, it was explained by the appellant that appellant renders
information Technology Enabled IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 115 of 331 Services to its group companies which primarily involves
approving and administering advertisements to conform to Google editorial
guidelines and responding to customer queries. This division of appellant is
involved in performing back office functions as described. The relevant reply
through this letter is extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:-

"February 15, 2013 The Deputy Director of Income-tax, (International
Taxation), Circle-1(1), No-14/3A, 6th Floor, Rashtrothan Parishad Bhavan,
Nrupathunga Road, Bangalore Dear Sir, Sub: Response to show cause for non-
deduction of tax at source on payments to non- residents Re: Letter No:
F.No.GIPL/Cir1(1)/2012-13 dated February 8, 2013 PAN: AACCG0527D; AY: 2006-07
to AY 2012-13 We refer to the above captioned notice dated February 8, 2013
(copy of the notice is enclosed as Annexure 1 for ease of reference), where in
your goodself has requested Google India Private Limited (`GIPL' or the
'Company') to submit certain information/ documents. In this regard, we wish
to submit the following for your favourable consideration:

1\. Whether service tax/ sales tax was paid by Google Ireland or Google India
on behalf of Google Ireland for marketing and distribution of AdWords Program.

In this regard, we wish to submit that Google Ireland Limited (`Google
Ireland') was not liable to pay service tax/ sales tax for the marketing and
distribution of the AdWords Program.

2\. Details of service rendered by the ITES division of GIPL to Google Ireland
and clarification as to whether the services rendered by ITES division of GIPL
is in any way related to AdWords program.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 116 of 331 GIPL renders
Information Technology Enabled Services ('IT enabled services') to its group
companies, which primarily involves approving and administering advertisements
to conform to the Google aloha, guidelines and responding to customer queries.
This division of GIPL is involved in performing back office functions as
described below:

>  Response to the queries of client's customers: The queries generated by
> the customers of Google entities flow from customers through a workflow
> based on pre-determined parameters. On receiving the query, the team
> responds to the query. The response to is routed through Google Ireland; and
>  Reviewing advertisements for the purpose of running the same on the Google
> website: These services mainly involve IT enabled data processing work. The
> data comes from the customer and is routed to GIPL through a workflow based
> on language and tier. On receiving the data, the team reviews the
> advertisement to ensure that the advertisement conforms with the Google
> editorial guidelines. If the advertisement does conform, the customer's
> advertisement can then be viewed on the websites of Google or its partners
> located outside India.

>  GIPL reviews the advertisement on accordance with the company law and the
> local law regulation, through various software. These are automated software
> which provides assistance by filtering the content of the ads with specified
> keywords and helps GIPL in reviewing the content of the ads.

Further, we wish to submit that the provision of IT enabled services is
independent of the distribution of the AdWords program to the advertisers in
India, since the IT enabled services rendered by GIPL include the following:

>  Review of the search results to ensure the outcome of the desired results
> or to improve upon the quality of search results;

>  Evaluation of Google services and tools for efficiency, bugs, performance,
> failure, etc.;

>  Data processing work i.e. once the advertiser registers for the AdWords
> through an online process, the advertisement is sent to the IT enabled
> services team to review for conformation with the editorial guidelines.
> These services are primarily carried out for AdWords services of other group
> entities outside India and not only for the advertisement from India.

Thus, the IT enabled services rendered by GIPL are to ensure that the
advertisements conform with the editorial guidelines and is not linked to the
distribution services.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 117 of 331

3\. Complete details of training given to GIPL for distribution of AdWords
Program as per Clause 2.2 of the Distribution Agreement.

As submitted on point no. 7 in our response to the questionnaire dated January
31, 2013, we wish to submit that, Google Ireland provides training to the
sales team of GIPL on the following:

>  Training on the AdWords program and how the AdWords program may benefit
> the advertisers in India  Training on the functionality of the tools
> available to optimize and follow an ad campaign on the AdWords system;

>  The new features/ additions made to the AdWords program and the
> implications for advertisers, etc."

95\. We have also examined the statement of Shri Vikas Agnihotri, Director
Sales, recorded by the AO on 19.02.2013 and in his statement, he has explained
that Google has an internal tool where available registered trademarks
information is uploaded. All new ads have to go through the review process and
the tool identifies such trademark violation in the ad text and rejects the ad
from being served. The tool is an integral part of Google operating platform
and accessible to review team in India and said tool is for internal review
process and hence not available to advertisers. The relevant question and
reply of Shri Agnihotri is extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:-

"Q9. In reference to contract with customer clause 2 of the contract sub-part
as stated "Customer grants Google permission to utilize and automated software
program to retrieve and analysis websites associated with the services for ad
quality and serving purposes, unless customer specifically opts out of the
evaluation in a manner specified by Google". What is the program utilized by
Google for the above.

Ans. The tool used in the applicable cases is Google Analytics and the same is
available online. The same can be access by people who have been given user Id
and passwords by the respective customer.

Q10. Under what conditions and circumstances a ad is disabled and what are the
tools used for the same IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 118 of 331 Google disables ads which are in non-conformity with the local
law and also not in accordance with Google ad policies. The compliance in this
context is looked into by a central support team of GIPL and they take
appropriate action. I will revert on the exact technicalities of disabling the
ad serving and the team responsible.

Q11. What are the tools available to the sales team for optimization of the ad
campaign Ans. The sales team uses Google Analytics tools for the optimization
as well as Google Adword and Adwords editor.

Q12. What is the policy regarding the usage of trademarks as keywords?

Ans. GIPL allows advertisers to bid on competitor's key words as well as
registered trademark so long as the specific competitor key word or trademark
is not a part of the ad text being shown by the said advertiser.

Q13. What tools is used to achieve the above.

134\. Ans. Google has an internal tool where available registered trademarks
information is uploaded. All new ads have to go through the review process and
the tool identifies such trademarks violations in the ad text and rejects the
ad from being served. The tool is integral to the Google operating platform
and accessible to the review team in India. To the best of my knowledge, the
said tool is for internal review process and hence not available to the
advertisers.

...............................

Q21 As per your experience of working with GIPL as Director Sales for Adword
Program, BFSI & Travel vertical, and in light of the above statements is it
possible to market, sell and maintain Adword program and accounts without the
use of internal tools..

Ans In continuation of my earlier statements, the internal tools mentioned by
the very nature and as the word tool means are there to assists and guide
advertisers to better manage their Adwords program. The Advertisers may choose
to run the Adword program without using these tools. From the GIPL perspective
the internal tool of which the reference was given for trademark and content
related question, the said tool is not specifically used for marketing or
selling the Adwords program. However, it is used to monitor the policies
governing trademarks and related to approvals for the Adword campaign."

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 119 of 331

96\. We have also examined the TP documentation filed by the assessee. During
the course of assessment proceedings while explaining the profile of the
appellant, it was stated by the appellant that Google India was incorporated
in December, 2003 with its registered office in Bangalore and Branches in
Hyderabad, Delhi and Mumbai and this company was wholly owned subsidiary of
Google Intenrational Inc. USA. The ownership structure of Google India is as
under:-

The ownership structure of Google India is as under:

    
    
           Google Inc                                      Google International LLC
      (An US based Company)                                (An US based Company)
    Holds 0.001% of Google India                        holds 99.999% of Google India
    
    
    
    
                                    Google India Private Limited
                                      (An Indian Company)
    
    
    
    
    

97\. With regard to QA engineering services, it was explained that this
involves evolution of Google services and tools for efficiency, bugs,
performance, failure and other aspects. The software is tested at Hyderabad
unit of Google India before it is ready for release. These services mainly
involve IT enabled data processing. The data comes from the customer and is
routed through Hyderabad unit through a workflow based on language and tier.
On receiving the data, the Adword team reviews the advertisement
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 120 of 331 according to company
policy and thereafter advertisement can be viewed on websites of Google or its
partners located outside India. While explaining the profile of AE i.e.,
Google Ireland Ltd., it was explained that Google Ireland Ltd., is the wholly
owned subsidiary of Google Ireland Holdings. It is an operating company of
Google group and deals in business of selling, marketing and supporting
certain internet search, advertising system and information organization and
management technology products and services. Pursuant to licenceagreement with
Google Netherland Holdings BV which in turn has a licence agreement with
Google Ireland Holdings, GIL makes use of Google intangible assets and pays an
arms' length royalty to Google Netherland Holdings BV which in turn pays
royalty to Google Ireland Holdings.

98\. The complex functioning of the online advertisement was examined by the
Tribunal in the case of ITO v. Right Florists Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and for the
sake of reference, we extract the relevant portion as under:-

> "5. To adjudicate on the issue in appeal, we will have to first understand
> the nature of services rendered by the Google and Yahoo. Both these
> companies own popular search engine websites, namely Google and Yahoo, and
> the advertising is done in the results generated by the search results
> against agreed keywords or by placing the advertising banners on websites.
> Yahoo and Google, as internet search engines, have brought about an
> information revolution and the entire conventional business model of
> businesses reaching out to the potential customers has undergone paradigm
> shift.

Nicholas Negroponte, in his classic book 'Being Digital' published in January
1995, had said that "Information about information is more important than
information" and illustrated this with an example, which IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 121 of 331 looks too simplistic today, that
"the fact that TV Guide makes more money than all the four major networks
combined". It was around this time that the search engines "Jerry and David's
Guide to the World Wide Web" and "backrub", former avatars of Yahoo and Google
respectively, made the business of information about information, which is
what these search engines are really involved in- with sophisticated
technology and process of great value proposition, a reality. The services
offered by Yahoo and Google are of the same nature, but, for the sake of
convenience, we will take up Google's case as an illustration for the nature
of services. Google is a web search engine. The way it works is this. A web
search engine is basically software code that is designed to search for
information on the World Wide Web. When an internet user needs information
about, inter alia, a product or service, he visits the website of the search
engine and keys in the search words. The software and database embedded in the
search engine than produces a large number of results, such as addresses of
the related websites so that internet user can then visit those website for
further information on that product or service. This query need not be about a
service or product only, it may relate to virtually anything under the sun.
These search engine results are sometimes in thousands, are generally
presented in a web pages, images, information and other types of files. While
producing these results, there are sponsored search results also, which is de
facto advertising, and these sponsored search results help those advertisers
visibility of their respective websites. Unlike web directories, which are
maintained only by human editors, search engines also maintain realtime
information by running an algorithm on a web crawler, and, therefore, the
advertising services offered by these search engines are practically without
any human touch and entirely automated. When we use these search engines, the
search results are produced which are termed as 'search engine result pages',
and, as we have seen a little while ago, these SERPs also include sponsored
search results or online advertising. The online advertising on SERPs is a
part of the business of search engines like Google. To an advertiser, it is
generally a three step process - advertiser creates advertisement and chooses
keywords, which are words or phrases relating to his business. When people
search on Google using one of the assigned keywords, the advertisement may
appear next to the search results. The advertisements are then before an
audience which is already interested in the related product or service. People
can simply click on these advertisements and they will reach the related
website so as to make a purchase or learn more about the product
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 122 of 331 or service. The
functioning of this form of online advertising can indeed be explained in such
simple terms, but actual rendering of this service is a highly technical
process. To search engines, providing this online advertising service, is a
complex technical activity and rendering of a highly technical service which
works with the use of software code that is designed to search for information
on the World Wide Web, and generate, alongwith the search results, sponsored
search results - the service which is paid for by the sponsors of those
results, like this assessee before us. On one hand, a web search engine like
Google, as we have noted earlier also, maintains real-time information by
running an algorithm on a web crawler, and, on the other hand, produces, in
the search results to the internet users, advertisement sponsored. It is
primarily for this service that the Google is paid for. An online advertising
could also be by way of a web banner or banner advertisement is a form of
advertising on the World Wide Web delivered by an adserver, an expression
which refers to technology and service that places advertisements on web
sites. The content of the adserver is constantly updated so that the website
or webpage on which the ads are displayed contains new advertisements, when
the site or page is visited or refreshed by a user. The purpose of ad serving
is to deliver targeted ads that match the website visitor's interest. This
form of online advertising entails embedding an advertisement into a web page.
It is intended to attract traffic to a website by linking to the website of
the advertiser. An ad server, which is at the core of this form of online
advertising, is a computer server, specifically a web server, that stores
advertisements used in online marketing and delivers them to website visitors.
Whichever be the form of advertising service, whether by sponsored results or
by web banner or by any other similar mode, there can hardly be any dispute on
the proposition that these search engines or ad servers, which are patented
and provide valuable services, which are essentially technical in nature. It
is this kind of advertising service for which the payments were made by the
assessee. Let us, for example, take the case of a florist in Shillong who
intends to use these services. His potential customer is a person looking for
a florist in Shillong. When such a person actually uses the search words
'florist' and 'Shillong' in Google, the search engine result page could be
like this:

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 123 of 331

99\. The above search engine result page shows several sponsored results,
termed and marked as "ads" and it is for these sponsored results being shown
on the search engine result page that the Google charges a fees. The mechanism
for this online advertising could be further appreciated by the following
screenshots:

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 124 of 331

100\. During the course of hearing, the ld. Standing counsel had placed
reliance upon the book of "Learning Google Adwords and Google Analytics"
authored by Benjamin Mangold, who was the first trainer certified by Google
for both Google Adwords and IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 125 of 331 Google Analytics in which he explained the functioning of
Google Adword program. According to the author, the following services are
required to be provided under the Adword program:

    
    
    a.    Display Keyword Targeting
    b.    Placement Targeting.
    c.    Topic Targeting.
    d.    Interest Categories.
    e.    Remarketing.
    f.    Gender Targeting.
    g.    Age Targeting.
    h.    Parent Status Targeting.
    i.    Display Campaign Optimiser
    j.    Location Targeting, Network Targeting
    k.    Physical Location Targeting
    l.    Schedule Targeting
    m.    YouTube Targeting
    n.    Device Targeting
    o.    AdSense
    
    

101\. During the course of hearing, though ld. Counsel for the assessee has
contended that service agreement was executed between the appellant and GIL
before execution of distribution agreement under which the appellant was to
render ITES services to GIL for which it was duly compensated, but during the
course of hearing, a specific query was raised to the ld. Counsel for the
assessee to demonstrate with evidence as to what other ITES services were
rendered apart from the services rendered for the Google Adword program. But
no specific reply was furnished by the learned Counsel for the assessee.

It was simply contended that the service agreement was executed prior to the
Adword IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 126 of 331
Distribution Agreement. Even in the affidavit of Shri. Hari Raju, Director of
the appellant company filed pursuant to the direction of the Tribunal to
explain the function of the Appellant under AdWord Program, it has not been
clearly spelt out as to what other services besides AdWord Program were
rendered by the Appellant to GIL.

102\. Now in the light of material available on the record in the form of
literature, submissions and orders of the authorities below we will try to
understand as to how the Adword program works. The Google AdWord Program is a
complex program and has various benefits viz., a) relevant ads of people b)
target of select audience c) it causes minimum advertisisng expenses d) it is
only payable when people are engaged. It gives advertiser the access to the
tools of the AdWord Program which can be accessed through the gateway of
Google India/Appellant through the use of patent technology. AdWord Program
gives the advertiser to choose the preferred time, season of the year when the
ads are to be shown. Once advertiser accepts the terms, the appellant gives
access to the various tools of AdWords Program. The time zone and display time
of the advertisement is identified and allocated by the appellant to the
advertiser with the help of Google AdWord Program. AdWord Program is more
focused and targeted in advertisement campaign which results into more
attention, engagement, delivery and conversion which is only possible on the
Google network with the access of tools of search engine and google analytics.
Appellant is having the access to IP address at desktop or laptop or IP
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 127 of 331 address of the
tablet, photographs, time spent on website, eating habits, wearing
preferences. With the help of IP address, Google search engine is having
access to various information and data pertaining to the user of the website
in the form of name, sex, city, state, country, phone number, religion, etc.
Besides the above basic information, Google is also having the access of the
history of the user as well as the behaviour of the person searching in google
engine. Based on various inputs mentioned above and contents of more than 2
million website, the Appellant was able to provide the effective focus ad
campaign to the advertiser. The AdWord Program and tools therein gives the
advertiser to pick up the keywords, phrases which are similar in nature and
germane, and in a digitalised and tabulated form and grouped together. The
advertiser is having the access to this Google Analytics Program through the
appellant.

Whenever one particular keyword is searched, the targeted ad will be shown ot
the consumer and by clicking on the ad, the consumer will be landed on a
webpage. The selection and display of the keyword, play a pivotal role in the
advertising campaign and for this purpose appellant has provided the
optimization and technique to the advertiser.

The appellant being a service provider under the agreement uses its expertise
and the information within its domain and control, to suggest the keywords
based on recent marketing material and need of the advertiser. The appellant
also suggests a periodical review of the website homepage, product and
services which can be bundled together.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 128 of 331 It also suggests the
traffic forecast of the list of keywords, multiple keywords placed to get the
new keyword ideas. Based on the initial keywords the advertiser enters, the
tools shows various keywords suggestion automatically grouped into different
adgroups. This is only possible if the Appellant is permitted to use
information, data and keyplanner to the advertiser which is patent and
protected software of the Google. The keyword planner also suggests the
suitability of the keywords which are useful in the particular month of the
year. The advertiser is able to plan its campaign for optimization or for the
purpose of getting more information and conversion based on keyword planners.
Based on this information and forecast, the advertiser is able to build on the
keywords.

103\. The display of the advertisement based on the keywords, is dependent
upon the auction price paid by the advertiser. The keywords bid at the highest
rate by the advertiser would be shown at the top of search result and
therefore, is likely to fetch more visibility and attention. With the help of
tools of Google, the advertiser as well as the appellant have an access to the
impact of change of keywords on the likely impressions of the advertisement.
With the help of keywords matching, various approaches are being adopted by
the Google AdWord Program i.e., broad match, phrase match and exact match. The
exact match for example allows the advertiser to focus on the optimization
phrase on the individual keywords and it yields the best results possible.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 129 of 331 Whereas, the phrase
match is more processing than broad match and the broad match provides the
greatest possibility of coverage of the advertisement.

104\. The appellant facilitates the advertisers to start the campaign of
advertising initially with the help of broad match thereafter with the phrase
match and thereafter with the exact match. With the help of keyword
management, the Google AdWord Program takes care of misspelling, singular,
plural, abbreviation, achronynms, stemming, etc. For example, if the
advertisement shows the formal shoes, then the keywords are the formal plus
shoes. If it is broad match keywords then the advertisement will show formal
shoes, sports shoes, black shoes, party shoes, etc. However, if the advertiser
had only opted for exact word match, then search result will show only a
formal shoe.

105\. The appellant helps the advertiser with the help of tools of AdWord
Program to include or delete various variation of keywords in the realm of
advertisement compaign and similarly the advertiser may with the help of
Google tool can avoid the unnecessary traffic on its website. For example, if
an advertiser does not want the visit of a surfer who is searching the service
apartment on rent basis and only wants the person surfing to buy the
apartment, then the Appellant can help him by putting negative words of rent
in the keyword search. Therefore, the only person who is searching for service
apartment IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 130 of 331
would be lending on the advertisers website and the person who is searching
for rented service apartment, would not be visiting the website of the
advertiser i.e., advertisement would not be displayed to him in the searched
result. Likewise, if the advertiser is selling leather cover for iPhone, then
the advertiser may not like that the person who is looking for leather cover
for another brand or item may visit the website of the advertiser. For that,
negative words can be used to avoid to improve the CTR (clicked through rate)
with the help of tools of Google. By using these tools, the Appellant has been
giving various suggestions to the advertisers to improve various keywords.

106\. The Google AdWord Program is also having Google Analytics which is
connected with the Google AdWord Program and which is a potential patented
tool to target the keywords and the negative keywords. This is the USP of the
Google AdWord Program, which is maintaining thousands of different keywords
used by people to search the website and based on this user behaviour, the
Google Analytics suggests the appropriate keywords to be used by the
advertiser for encouraging the traffic on the website.

Similarly, the Google Analytics also uses the same data to filter out the
negative keywords on the basis of which an unattended or unwarranted person
have landed on the website of the advertiser. The Appellant is using all these
tools in conjucture with the advertisers at the time of granting the backhand
services to advertisers, as the Appellant is having access to all these data,
information, etc. IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 131 of 331

107\. On the basis of the above, we are of the view that the agreement between
the assessee and GIL is not only in the nature of providing the space for
advertisement and display the advertisement to the consumers. If we look into
the advertisement module of the AdWord Program, we will come to an
irrestitable conclusion that it is not merely an agreement to provide
advertisement space but it is an agreement for facilitating the display and
publishing of an advertisement to the targeted customers.

108\. We have also examined the obligations cast upon the appellant under the
agreements and found the obligation cast upon the appellant under the Google
Adword distribution agreement can only be discharged with the help of the ITES
division. Therefore, the Google Adword distributor agreement and the service
agreement are to be read together as they are interconnected with the navel
cord and without resorting to the service agreement the terms and conditions
under the Google AdWord Distribution Agreement cannot be complied with.
Therefore, in order to understand the function of Google Adword program, we
have to read both the agreements together.

109\. Now the question comes as to whether the payment made by the appellant
to Google Ireland is in the nature of payment of royalty or a business profit
in the hands of Google Ireland. In this regard, our attention was invited to
the fact that Google Ireland IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 132 of 331 is a non-resident and does not have any Permanent
Establishment in India, therefore the payment made to Google Ireland is in the
form of business profit and not taxable in India. But the revenue has treated
the payment made by the appellant to Google Ireland after retaining a
particular percentage of advertisement receipts as a payment of royalty and is
chargeable to tax u/.s 9(1)(vi) of the Act. Since the appellant has not
deducted tax at source on such payments u/s. 195 of the Act, the AO had
treated the assessee to be in default and raised the demand under section 201
and 201A of the Act.

110\. The AO has also held that the GIL is not the beneficial owner of the sum
paid/payable by GIPL and therefore the rate of tax as provided under India-
Ireland DTAA @ 10% cannot be applied. He further held that GIL which is
claimed to be the beneficial owner of the sum paid/payable by GIPL is
controlled and managed from Bermuda with whom India has not entered into DTAA.
Therefore, rate of tax on royalty paid/payable by GIPL under the Act will have
to applied. Accordingly, royalty was taxed @ 10.556% under section 115A of the
Act.

111\. During the course of hearing, the learned Counsel for the assessee has
invited our attention to various judicial pronouncements with the submissions
that similar type of payments made by the advertisers to the non-residents,
who owns the search engine was considered to be the business profit of the
non-resident and in the absence of their IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 133 of 331 permanent establishment in India, the
business profit was not liable to be taxed in India.

Therefore, we prefer to examine the judgments referred to by the assessee in
support of his contention as to whether the judgments apply to the present
facts of the case or not.

Heavy reliance was placed upon the order of the Tribunal in the case of ITO
Vs. Right Florist (supra) in which the Tribunal has held that the payments
made by the advertiser to Google and Yahoo is a business profit in the hands
of the recipient and in the absence of the permanent establishment of the non-
resident, the business income cannot be taxed in India. In that case, the
facts culled out by the Tribunal are that the assessee is a florist who uses
such advertising with search engine through Google and Yahoo to generate
business. Whenever, anyone does a web search on a respective search engine in
looking for a particular website and uses certain keywords, the advertisement
of the assessee is shown along with the search results. The assessee has made
certain payments in respect of online advertising to US based entities viz.,
Google Ireland Ltd., and overture service Inc., USA (Yahoo USA). No taxes were
withheld from these payments and during the course of assessment proceedings,
the AO required the assessee to show cause as to why these payments are not to
be disallowed as deduction in computation of its income under section
40(a)(ia) of the Act. The stand of the assessee was that these payments are
made to foreign entities who did not have any permanent establishment in
India. Therefore, the same were not taxable in India. The AO rejected the
claim of the assessee. The IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 134 of 331 assessee's contention that even under section 9(1) of the
Income Tax Act, only so much of the income of the non-resident can be brought
to tax as reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India were
rejected by the AO and he observed that irrespective of whether or not, in
assessee's opinion, the income was taxable in India, the assessee ought to
have approached the AO under section 195 prior to making the foreign
remittance. Assessee's failure to do so, according to the AO, was contrary to
the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Transmission
Corporation of AP Ltd., Vs. CIT 239 ITR 587. With these observations, AO has
disallowed the payment made by the assessee under section 40(a)(ia) of the
Act. Assessee carried the matter before the CIT(A) but did not find favour
with him and finally the matter travelled to the Tribunal. The Tribunal,
having examined the nature of the advertisement programmes and the services
rendered by the non-resident, was of the view that receipt in respect of
online advertisement on Google and Yahoo cannot be brought to tax in India
under the provisions of the Income Tax Act and also in the absence of their
permanent establishment in India, under the provisions of India-USA and India-
Ireland tax treaty.

The relevant observations of the Tribunal are as under:

"28. In view of the above discussions, we are of the considered view, on the
limited facts of the case as produced before us„ the receipts in respect of
online advertising on Google and Yahoo cannot be brought to tax in India under
the provisions of the Income Tax Act, as also under the provisions of India US
and India Ireland tax treaty. This IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 135 of 331 observation is subject to the rider that so far as the PE
issue is concerned, we have examined the existence of PE only on the basis of
website simplicitor, and on no other additional basis, as no case was made out
for the same. In any case, revenue has not brought anything on record, either
at assessment stage or even before us, to suggest that Google or Yahoo had a
PE in India, and as held by a Special Bench of this Tribunal in the case of
Motorola Inc Vs DCIT (95 ITD 269 SB), "DTAA is only an alternate tax regime
and not an exemption regime" and, therefore, "the burden is first on the
Revenue to show that the assessee has a taxable income under the DTAA, and
then the burden is on the assessee to show that that its income is exempt
under DTAA". No such burden is discharged by the Revenue. Accordingly, there
is no material before us to come to the conclusion that Google or Yahoo had a
PE in India, which, in turn, could constitute the basis of their taxability in
India.

29\. Now that we have come to the conclusion that Google and Yahoo did not
have any tax liability in India, in respect of the advertising revenues in
question, the next question that we need to deal is whether or not assessee
still had a tax witholding obligation in respect remittances for these online
advertising payments, and whether assesse's failure to withhold taxes even
when the recipient did not have tax liability could be visited with
disallowance under section 40(a)(i). It is only elementary that when recipient
of an income does not have the primary tax liability in respect of an income,
the payer cannot have vicarious tax withholding liability either. This
position is independent of the payer having moved an application under section
195 or not, or on the payer or the payee having obtained an advance ruling in
their favour or not. The law is now very well settled in this regard by
Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgment in the case of GE India Technology Centre Pvt
Ltd Vs CIT (327 ITR 456) wherein Their Lordships have categorically held that,
"where a person responsible for deduction is fairly certain, then he can make
his own determination as to whether the tax was deductible at source and, if
so, what should IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 136 of 331
be the amount thereof". In the said case, Their Lordships have, rejecting
revenue's reliance on Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgment in Transmission's case
(supra) - which has also been referred to by the Assessing Officer, observed
as follows:

> .......In Transmission Corporation case (supra) a non-resident had entered
> into a composite contract with the resident party making the payments. The
> said composite contract not only comprised supply of plant, machinery and
> equipment in India, but also comprised the installation and commissioning of
> the same in India. It was admitted that the erection and commissioning of
> plant and machinery in India gave rise to income taxable in India. It was,
> therefore, clear even to the payer that payments required to be made by him
> to the non- resident included an element of income which was exigilble to
> tax in India. The only issue raised in that case was whether TDS was
> applicable only to pure income payments and not to composite payments which
> had an element of income embedded or incorporated in them. The controversy
> before us in this batch of cases is, therefore, quite different. In
> Transmission Corporation case (supra) it was held that TDS was liable to be
> deducted by the payer on the gross amount if such payment included in it an
> amount which was exigible to tax in India. It was held that if the payer
> wanted to deduct TDS not on the gross amount but on the lesser amount, on
> the footing that only a portion of the payment made represented "income
> chargeable to tax in India", then it was necessary for him to make an
> application under Section 195(2) of the Act to the ITO(TDS) and obtain his
> permission for deducting TDS at lesser amount. Thus, it was held by this
> Court that if the payer had a doubt as to the amount to be deducted as TDS
> he could approach the ITO(TDS) to compute the amount which was liable to be
> deducted at source. In our view, Section 195(2) is based on the "principle
> of proportionality". The said sub-Section gets attracted only
> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 137 of 331 in cases where the
> payment made is a composite payment in which a certain proportion of payment
> has an element of "income" chargeable to tax in India. It is in this context
> that the Supreme Court stated, "If no such application is filed, income-tax
> on such sum is to be deducted and it is the statutory obligation of the
> person responsible for paying such 'sum' to deduct tax thereon before making
> payment. He has to discharge the obligation to TDS". If one reads the
> observation of the Supreme Court, the words "such sum" clearly indicate that
> the observation refers to a case of composite payment where the payer has a
> doubt regarding the inclusion of an amount in such payment which is exigible
> to tax in India. In our view, the above observations of this Court in
> Transmission Corporation case (supra) which is put in italics has been
> completely, with respect, misunderstood by the Karnataka High Court to mean
> that it is not open for the payer to contend that if the amount paid by him
> to the non-resident is not at all "chargeable to tax in India", then no TDS
> is required to be deducted from such payment. This interpretation of the
> High Court completely loses sight of the plain words of Section 195(1) which
> in clear terms lays down that tax at source is deductible only from "sums
> chargeable" under the provisions of the I.T. Act, i.e., chargeable under
> Sections 4, 5 and 9 of the I.T. Act.

30\. In view of the above discussions, as also bearing in mind entirety of the
case, we are of the considered view that there was no failure in deduction of
tax at source by the assessee before us inasmuch as the assessee did not have
any obligation to deduct tax at source under section 195 for the simple reason
that income embedded in impugned payments was not exigible to tax in India.
Accordingly, the disallowance under section 40(a)(i) was uncalled for. Learned
CIT(A) rightly deleted the impugned disallowance.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 138 of 331 We uphold the
conclusions arrived at by the CIT(A) and decline to interfere in the matter."

112\. In this order, the Tribunal has placed a reliance upon the other order
of the Tribunal in the case of Pinstorm Technologies Pvt. Ltd., Vs. ITO
(supra).

113\. In the case of Pinstorm Technologies Pvt. Ltd., the facts culled out by
the AO are that the assessee company was engaged in the business of digital
advertising and internet marketing. It utilizes the internet search engine
such as Google and Yahoo, etc., to buy space in advertising on the internet on
behalf of its client. The search engine carries out its own programme whereby
the assessee books certain words called "keywords". Whenever any person
searches through the net of specific keywords, the advertisement of the
assessee or its client is displayed. The price charged for such bookings
depends on type of its phrase, its popularity, usage, etc. The search engine
renders the services world wide basis and thus is not relatable to any
specific country. The entire transaction takes place through the internet and
even the invoice is raised and payment is made through internet. During the
year under consideration, the assessee company had made a payment of
Rs.1,09,35,108/- to Google Ireland Limited and the said payment was claimed as
advertisement expenses. While making the said payment, no tax at source was
deducted by the assessee on the ground that amount paid to Google Ireland
Limited constituted business profit of the said company and since the said
company did not have a permanent establishment (PE) in India, the amount
payable was not taxable in India. According to AO, the services rendered by
the Ireland company to the assessee was in the nature of technical services
and hence the assessee company was liable to deduct tax at source from the
payment made against the said services. Since no such tax at source was
deducted by the assessee, the deduction claimed by the assessee on account of
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 139 of 331 expenditure incurred
on payment of advertisement charges to M/s. Google Ireland was disallowed by
the AO by invoking the provisions of section 40(a)(ia) of the Act. The
disallowance was challenged before the CIT(A) and the CIT(A), while confirming
the disallowance has held that payment made by the assessee to Google Ireland
for the services rendered was in the nature of royalty, chargeable to tax in
India and assessee is therefore liable to deduct tax at source from the said
payment. The matter went to the Tribunal and the Tribunal, relying upon the
order of the Tribunal in the case of Yahoo India Pvt. Ltd., (supra) has held
that the amount payable by the assessee to Google Ireland for the services
rendered for uploading and display of banner of advertisement on its portal
was in the nature of business on which no tax was deductible at source since
the same was not chargeable in India in the absence of any permanent
establishment (PE) of Google Ireland Ltd., in India.

114\. Since this case was adjudicated by the Tribunal in the light of order of
the Tribunal in the case of Yahoo India Pvt. Ltd., (supra) therefore, it has
become necessary for us to examine the facts in the case of Yahoo India Pvt.
Ltd. In the case of Yahoo India Pvt. Ltd., the facts culled by the Tribunal in
its order are that the assessee company is fully owned subsidiary of Yahoo
Inc., USA which is engaged in the business of providing consumer services such
as search engine content and information on wide spectrum of topics, email,
chat, etc. During the course of assessment proceedings, it was noticed by the
AO that assessee has made a payment of Rs.34,86,947 to Yahoo Holdings (Hong
Kong) Ltd., being cost of services/research material/ advertisement media.
Yahoo Holding (Hong Kong) Ltd., is engaged in the business of providing
internet services, technological tools, marketing solutions for business to
customers in Hong Kong. It provides banner advertisement and Microsoft hosting
services on Yahoo Hong Kong portal. The banner advertisement is also known as
web banner which is a form of IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 140 of 331 advertisement on the world wide web page. During the year
under consideration, the Department of Tourism of India, through an
advertisement agency media turf world wide intended to display a banner
advertisement during the period from 18.02.2004 to 15.03.2004 on the portal
owned by Yahoo Holding (Hong Kong) Ltd. For this purpose, it hired the
services of assessee company to approach Yahoo Holding (Hong Kong) Ltd., to
provide uploading and display services for hosting the banner advertisements
at Yahoo Hong Kong portal. Accordingly, the assessee company entered into the
contract in the form of media insertion order for display of impressions with
the Department of Tourism. The total consideration for the same was agreed for
Rs.65,11,500/- out of which assessee company agreed for granting agency
discount to media turf of 25%. The assessee company in turn hired the services
of Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., for uploading and display of banner
advertisement on its portal and the consideration for the said services was
agreed at US$75,464, equivalent to Indian Rs.34,86,947/-. The said payment to
M/s. Yahoo Holding (Hong Kong) Ltd., was made by the assessee during the year
under consideration without deducting tax at source. The stand of the
assessee, as taken before the AO was that since the services/operation
performed by the Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., was entirely outside India
and since Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., had no presence in India, the
amount paid by them for the services rendered outside India was not taxable in
India and no tax therefore was required to be deducted at source from the
payment of the said amount. According to the AO, the income attributable to
the services claimed to be rendered outside India has accrued in India as per
provisions of section 9 and the same is being taxable in India. Therefore, the
assessee is required to deduct the tax at source before remitting the said
amount to Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd. Since no tax was deducted by
assessee company from the payment remitted to Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd.,
deduction claimed by the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 141 of 331 assessee on account of the said payment was disallowed by the
AO by invoking the provisions of section 40(a)(ia) of the Act.

115\. Aggrieved, the assessee preferred an appeal before the CIT(A) but did
not find any favour with him and ultimately the matter reached the Tribunal
and the Tribunal held that since the banner advertisements hosting service did
not involve use or right to use by the assessee of any industrial, commercial
or scientific equipment and no such use was actually granted by Yahoo Holdings
(Hong Kong) Ltd., limited to the assessee company and uploading and display of
the banner advertisement on its portal was entirely the responsibility of the
Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., the assessee company was only required to
provide the banner advertisement to Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., for
uploading the same on its portal. Thus the assessee had no right to access the
portal of Yahoo Holdings and there is nothing to show any positive act of
utilization or employment of the portal of the Yahoo Holdings by the assessee
company. In the light of these facts, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that
payments made by the assessee to Yahoo Holding (Hong Kong) Ltd., for the
services rendered for uploading and display of banner advertisement to the
Department of Tourism on its portal was not in the nature of royalty and the
same was in the nature of business profit and in the absence of any permanent
establishment (PE) of Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., in India, it was not
chargeable to tax in India. Therefore, the assessee was not required to deduct
TDS from the payment made to Yahoo Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd., for services
rendered. Therefore, the payment so made cannot be disallowed by invoking the
provisions of section 40(a)(ia) for non-deduction of TDS.

116\. In all these cases, the assessee was either an advertiser or act on
behalf of some other advertiser and has purchased space from the owner of
search engine to display its IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 142 of 331 advertisements online. Therefore, the payment made by the
assessee to the owner of the search engine was considered to be business
receipt / business profit in the hands of the owner of search engine who is
non-resident and in the absence of permanent establishment (PE) in India, the
business profits / business receipts received by them were not chargeable to
tax in India. But in the instant case, appellant has not purchased the
advertisement space for putting its advertisement online from the GIL. The
assessee has been duly appointed a distributor under the Google Adword
Distribution Agreement to distribute and sell the advertisement space obtained
from the GIL under the Distribution Agreement. Under the distribution
agreement, appellant was under obligation to provide pre-sale and after sale
services with the help of ITES division. While providing after sales services
/ technical services, the assessee had access to the intellectual property
rights and tools and informatives, derivative works owned by the GIL. In the
instant case, assessee is not a simpliciter buyer of AdWord Space for putting
the advertisement either for himself or for others which was the position in
the aforesaid cases referred to by the assessee. Therefore, we are of the view
that the facts of the case referred to by the assessee i.e., Pinstorm
Technologies Ltd., Right Florist and Yahoo India Ltd., are different than the
facts of the instant case. Thus the ratio laid down in those cases would not
be applicable to the present facts of the case.

117\. The learned Counsel for the assessee has also emphatically argued that
the issue involved in these appeals is squarely covered by the aforesaid
judgments in the case of Right Florist, Pinstorm Technologies Ltd., Yahoo
India Ltd., Therefore, issue may be decided following the ratio laid down in
the aforesaid cases. If the Tribunal takes a view contrary to the view taken
in the aforesaid cases, the matter may be referred to larger bench. In this
regard, we have carefully perused the facts of the aforesaid cases and we
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 143 of 331 find the facts of
those cases are different and therefore the ratio laid down therein cannot be
followed in the instant case. Hence we do not find any merit in the contention
of the assessee for making a reference to larger bench if contrary view is
required to be taken. We therefore reject these contentions of the assessee.

118\. A reference was also made upon the order of the Tribunal in the case of
Taj TV Ltd., (Supra), and on its perusal, we find in para 3, the Tribunal has
recorded the facts of the case according to which Taj TV Ltd., has appointed
Taj India as distributor vide agreement dated 01.03.2002 to distribute an
encrypted advertiser and/or subscription supportive television programme
services known as Ten Sports for cable systemsolely for exhibitions to
subscribers in India. As per the said agreement, the distribution revenue
collected by Taj India will be split in the ratio of 60:40 between Taj TV and
Taj India. The amount payable by Taj India to Taj TV shall be net of Indian
Income Tax. Taj TV is registered in Mauritius and also does not have any
branch office in India. Further telecasting is being done from outside India.
It was contended in that case that Taj TV does not have permanent
establishment in India and the transaction entered into by Taj TV are on
principal to principal basis at arm's length price. Taj India does not have
any authority to enter into any contract on behalf of Taj TV and all the
advertisements, sale contracts are entered into between the advertisers and
the Taj TV. The commission of 10% in respect of advertisement revenue is fair
and consistent with the industry practice. The Tribunal examined the Revenue's
contention for treating the payment to be royalty and came to the conclusion
that the assessee only makes available the content to the cable operator which
are transmitted by them to the ultimate customer/viewer and under the
Distribution Agreement, assessee has not been granted any licence to use any
copyright to the distributor or to the cable operator. The rights
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 144 of 331 over the content at
all times lies with the assessee company and are never made available with the
distributor or cable operator. Therefore, impugned income will not constitute
royalty. The relevant observation of the Tribunal in this regard is extracted
hereunder for the sake of reference:

"So far as ground No.3 is concerned, that the distribution of income should be
taxable as 'royalty' under section 9(1)(vi) up to 12th July, 2002, we are
unable to concur with the divergent stand taken by the AO that for three
months e payment will constitute 'royalty' and for balance nine months, the
payment will constitute 'business income'. It has also been brought to our
knowledge that in the subsequent years the AO has treated 'distribution
income' as business income and not as royalty. Thus, prior to period 12th
July, 2002, also when assessee was not registered under the Laws of Mauritius
then also it will not affect the nature of income. In any case, as stated
earlier, under the distribution agreement, the assessee company has not
granted any license to use any copyright to the distributor or to the
cabreoperators. The assessee only makes available the content to the cable
operators. operators which are transmitted by them to the ultimate
customer/viewers. Further, rights over the content at all times lies with the
Assessee Company and are never made available with the distributors or cable
operators. Thus, the finding of the CIT(A) on this score is also confirmed
that even for the first period 01.04.2002 to 12th July, 2002 the said income
will not constitute `royalty'."

119\. Whereas in the instant case, assesse was appointed as distributor under
the AdWord Distributor Agreement with the condition that assesse would provide
on sale and after sale service which required the involvement of technical
know-how, IPRs, derivative workss, etc. In the case of Taj TV, the Taj TV has
simply appointed the distributor and no licence was given to the distributor
to use the technology developed by Taj TV. The distributor was simply allowed
to further transmit the programs to the viewers/customers. Therefore, facts of
Taj TV Ltd., and the facts of the assesse are entirely different and the ratio
laid down in this case cannot be applied to the facts of the present case.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 145 of 331

120\. A reference was also made in the case of DDIT Vs. Set India Pvt. Ltd.,
(supra) and on its perusal, we find that a consideration was paid by the
assesse to Set Satellite Singapore Pte. Ltd., for acquiring non-exclusive
right to distribute set and set max channels. The Revenue has treated it to be
in the nature of royalty taxable at 15% on the gross basis under article 12 of
India-Signapore DTAA whereas the assesse treated it to be the business profit.
The facts of the case are that Set Satellite Singapore Pte. Ltd., is a company
registered in Singapore and the said non-resident company operates television
channels viz., Set and Setmax in India. The said non-resident company also
converts ad air times for the said channels and also entered into agreement
for distribution of TV channels in India. As per the agreement, 70%
distribution revenue is received by non-resident company and 30% of
distribution revenue is taken by assesse company as consideration for the
distribution of non-resident TV channels in India. The said non-resident
company does not have any permanent establishment in India and as per article
5 DTAA its business profit is not taxable in India. While adjudicating the
issue, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that non-resident company has
granted non-exclusive distribution agreement rights to the channels to the
assessee or has not given any right to use or exploit any copyright. The
assessee no way concerned whether programs broadcast by the non-resident are
copyrighted or not. The Tribunal further observed that said distribution is
purely a commercial right which is distinct from the right to use copyright.
The Tribunal has placed the reliance upon the clause 6.3 of distribution
agreement entered between the assessee company and non-resident which states
as right granted to the assessee under the agreement is not at all and shall
not be construed to grant of any licence or transfer of any right or any
copyright. The Tribunal further observed that cable operator only re-transmits
the TV signals transmitted to it by broadcaster without any editing delays
additions and therefore payment made by the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 146 of 331 assessee to the non-resident company is not
for use of any copyright and cannot be characterized as royalty. But in the
instant case, assesseee was not appointed as a distributor simpliciter. The
obligation was also cast upon the appllant under the distribution agreement to
provide onsale and after sale services and these services could not be
provided without resorting to technical support of the ITES division including
the access to technical know-how, IPRs, copyright, derivative works etc.
Therefore, facts of the case of Set India Pvt.Ltd., and facts of the instant
case are not similar. Thus, the ratio laid down in that case will not apply to
the present case.

121\. A further reliance was also placed upon the judgment of the Delhi High
Court in the case of DIT Vs. New Sky Satellite (2016) 68 Taxmann.com 8 Delhi
and on its perusal we find that the assessee is a company incorporated in
Thailand was engaged in the business providing digital broadcasting services
as well as consultancy services to its customers who consisted of both
residents of India and non-residents. The assessee company provided its
services through its satellite T. In the course of assessment proceedings, the
AO opined that income earned by assessee in India was taxable under 9(1)(vi)
and the assessee would not get benefit of article 12 of India-Thailand DTAA.
The Tribunal, relying upon the judgment of Delhi High Court in the case Asia
Satellite Telecommunication Company Ltd., Vs. DIT 332 ITR 340 in which it has
been held that receipts earned from providing data transmission services to
space segment capacity on satellite did not constitute royalty within the
meaning of section 9(1)(vi) and while providing transmission services to its
customers, the control of satellite always remained with the satellite
operator and the customers were only given access to the transponder capacity,
held that the receipt of the customers earned from providing data transmission
service did not fall within the term of royality under section 9(1)(vi) of the
act. The IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 147 of 331
matter travelled to the Hon"ble High Court and the Hon'ble High Court, while
adjudicating the issue has taken the cognizance of the amendments brought in
section 9(1)(vi) of the Act and has held "that it is fallacious to assume that
any change made to domestic law to rectify a situation of mistaken
interpretation can spontaneously farther their case in an international
treaty. Therefore mere amendment to section 9(1)(vi) cannot result in change.
It is imperative that such amendment brought about in the agreement as well.
Any attempt short of this even if it is evidence of state's of discomfort at
letting data broadcast revenue's ship will be insufficient to persuade this
court to hold that such amendments are applicable to DTAAs". Their Lordship
further held that "since the Finance Act 2012 will not effect article 12 of
DTAA, it would follow that the first determinative interpretation given to the
word 'royalty' in Asia Satellite,when the definition were in fact pari-materia
(in the absence of any contouring explanation), will continue to hold the
field for the purpose of assessment year precedent to the Finance Act, 2012
and in all cases which involve DTAA, unless the said DTAA are amended jointly
amended by both the parties to incorporate income from data transmission
services as par-taking the nature of royalty. In the instant case, assessee
was appointed as a distributor with certain obligations and the obligations
cannot be fulfilled without having access to technical know-how, trade mark,
derivative works, brand features, etc., of the GIL. Therefore, the ratio laid
down in this case will not apply to the present case. We have also examined
the other judgments referred to by the assessee during the course of hearing
and we find that facts of those cases are different from the facts of the
instant case. Therefore, no assistance from those cases in favour of the
assessee.

122\. We have also examined the judgements referred to by the Revenue and in
the case of CIT Vs. Synopsys International Old Ltd., (supra). We find that
Synopsys US, was IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 148 of 331
the owner of the copyright of electronic design and automation (EDA),
Tool/software in certain geographies. It granted a licence to Synopsys
International Ltd., Ireland, the assessee. The technical licence agreement is
for a consideration to enable the assessee to use and commercially exploit the
IP in EDA, tools and software in certain geographies. Synopsys US specially
required the assessee to enter into end user software licence agreement (EULA)
with the customers. The EULA between the assessee and the Indian customers has
elaborate and restrictive clause, primarily with the object of protecting the
owner's right in the product, documentation and IP in the software. The
reading of the agreement shows that Indian customers had purchased the
licenced product i.e., electronic design automation (EDA), tools /software
from the assessee for its use as a tool on application software. The EDA tool
support the design and production of integrated circuit (ICs).As fabrication
process is an extensive process, IC manufactures meticulously follow the
design flow process before fabrication of the I.C is taken up. EDA tools are
used in this design flow process. Design flow is a procedure which contain
several sub-procedures.

123\. The assessee received US $9,98,098, US $ 33, 53, 253 and US $ 20,97,003
respectively for 3 assessment years i.e., 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 from
Indian customers. The notice under section 147 was issued. The assessee filed
a return for all 3 years declaring Nil income but applied refund. The AO
however held that assessee is liable to pay tax under section 9(1)(vi) and 20%
on gross basis for first 2 sassessment year and 10% for the third assessment
year. An appeal was preferred before the CIT(A). The CIT(A) has held that the
software given in use to Indian customers was named in the agreement as
'Synopsys software'. Had this software been itself got through licence from
other companies, the name of software company would have borne the name of
that company from which it was received. The CIT(A) further observed that what
is IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 149 of 331 transferred through
the agreement was a licence to use the synopsys software i.e. a copyright
owned by the appellant itself and not the copyright of the copyrighted
article. Hence the receipt squarely fell under definition of royalty and
therefore taxable in India.

124\. Aggrieved, assessee preferred an appeal before the Tribunal with the
contention that it is goods and not by way of licence agreement, the software
only was allowed to use. In other words a copyrighted article was transferred
and no transfer was made in respect of copyright. Being not convinced with the
contention of the assessee, the Tribunal held that fees received by the
assessee could not be treated as royalty as defined under section 9(1)(vi) of
the Act. Revenue preferred an appeal before the Hon'ble High Court and before
the Hon'ble High Court the following question was raised:

1\. Whether consideration paid by Indian customers or end users, to the
assessee for transfer of right to use the software/computer programme is in
respect of the copyright and falls within the mischief of royalty as defined
under sub-clause (v) to explanation 2 to clause (vi) of section 9(1) of the
Act.

125\. The Hon'ble High Court extensively dealt with the issue in the light of
various judicial pronouncements. The Hon'ble High Court has observed that the
licence is a permission to do something that would otherwise be unlawful and
the question arise therefore as to what legal permission is granted by the
software licence. For transfer of such right, if consideration is paid, it is
not a consideration for transfer of copyright but for use of IP embedded in
the copyright and therefore it is for the transfer of one of those rights of
the owner of the copyright. It is not a copyright but it is in respect of a
copyright. When copyrighted article is sold and the end user gets the right to
use the intellectual property embedded therein, it is not a right in the
copyright as such. Therefore, the mode IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 150 of 331 adopted or the terminology given is not decisive to decide the
nature of transfer, ultimately it is substance which is to be looked into. The
relevant observation of the Hon'ble High Court in this regard is extracted
hereunder for the sake of reference:

"43. A licence is a permission to do something that would otherwise be
unlawful. The question arises, therefore, as to what legal permission is
granted by a software licence. The answer is, briefly, that in some cases the
licence will be a permission to use confidential information, and in virtually
in all cases it will be a permission to copy a copyright work. If the software
has been kept secret by the producer, or only supplied on conditions of
confidentiality and has not been published too widely, then the software
licence will be akin to a licence of confidential information or know-how. The
owner or licensor of a copyright, has a right to t permission to use the
software or a computer programme, in respect of which they have a copyright,
without transferring the right in copyright. It is one of the right of a
copyright. owner or licensor. Without such right being transferred, the end-
user has no right to use the software or computer programme. If he uses it, it
amounts to infringement of copyright. For transfer of such right if
consideration is paid, it is not a consideration for transfer of a copyright
but for use of intellectual property embedded in the copyright, and therefore
it is for transfer of one of those rights of the owner of the copyright. It is
not a right in copyright but it is in respect of a copyright. When a
copyrighted article is sold also, the end-user gets the right to use tile
intellectual property embedded in the copyright and not a right in the
copyright as such. Therefore the mode adopted or the. terminology given is not
decisive to decide the nature of transfer. Ultimately, it is the substance
which has to be looked into.

44\. Therefore, it is necessary to look into the terms of the agreement
entered into between the parties, as it would be purely question of fact to be
decided on the basis of the intention of the parties as could be gathered from
the written words used in the agreement."

126\. Having examined the contents and substance of end user software licence
agreement executed between Synopsys International Ltd., and Athena
Semiconductor Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India (end user), the Hon'ble High Court
has come to the conclusion that from the description of the agreement, it is
an end user software licence IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 151 of 331 agreement, according to which software licence synopsys grant
licencee a non-exclusive non-transferrable licence without right of sub-
licence to use the licenced software in design techniques only in the quantity
of authorized by licencee in accordance to documentation in the use area.
Their Lordship further held that even if it is not transfer of exclusive right
of copyright, the right to use the confidential information embedded in the
software in terms of aforesaid licence makes it abundantly clear that there is
transfer of certain rights which the owner of a copyright possess in the said
computer software programme in respect of copyright owned. In terms of the
DTAA, the consideration paid for the use or the right to use the said
confidential information in the form of computer programme software itself
constitutes royalty and attract taxes. The relevant observation of the Hon'ble
High Court is extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:

"As is clear from the description of the agreement it is an end-user software
licence agreement. Clause 2.1 deals with grant of rights. It provides,
Software License Synopsys hereby grants licencee a non-exclusive, non-
transferable license, without right of sub-licence of use the licensed
software and design techniques onlyin the quantity authorized by a licensee in
accordance with the documentation in the use area. Licensee may make a
reasonable number of copies of the licensed software for backup and/or
archival purposes only. Merely because the words non-exclusive and non-
transferable is used in the said licence it does not take away the software
out of the definition of the copyright. The word licenced software has been
defined. Similarly, the words design, design technique is also defined. The
word documentation is also defined and it is not in dispute what is granted is
a license. Even if it is IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 152 of 331 not transfer of exclusive right in the copyright, the right to
use the confidential information embedded in the software in terms of the
aforesaid licence makes itabundantly clear that there is transfer of certain
rights which the owner of copyright possess in the said computer sotware
/programme in respect of the copyright owned. In terms of the DTAA the
consideration paid for the use or right to use the said confidential
information in the form of computer programme software itself constitutes
royalty and attracts tax. It is not necessary that there should be a transfer
of exclusive right in the copyright as contended by the assessee. The
consideration paid is for rights in respect of the copyright and for the user
of the confidential information embedded in the software/computer programme.
Therefore, it falls within the mischief of Explanation (2) of clause (vi) of
sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Act and there is a liability to pay the
tax.

46\. If there was any doubt regarding the taxability of this income the
parliament by Finance Act, 2010 has substituted the explanation to section 9
which gives a clear intention of the legislature insofar as the liability of
tax under this provision is concerned. A perusal of the said explanation makes
it clear that as there was a doubt earlier, they want to remove the doubts by
introducing this explanation. By the explanation they have declared that for
the purpose of section 9 which deals with income deemed to accrue or arise in
India, under clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) of sub-section (1), such income shall
be included in the total income of the nonresident, whether or not (i) the
non-resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in
India,

(ii) the non-resident has rendered services in India. Therefore, the object is
to levy tax on the income of a non-resident, if it has accrued or arisen in
India and one such income is the income from royalty."

127\. In the instant case, under the AdWord Distribution Agreement, certain
obligations were cast upon assessee in order to provide efficient on sale and
after sale services which are only possible with the aid of ITES division.
Under this AdWord Agreement and the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 153 of 331 Service Agreement, the assessee was given licence to use the
confidential information, technical know-how, trade mark, brand features,
derivative works, etc. Though the ownership of these intangibles remains with
the GIL or the Google Inc., but the assessee was given the licence to use it
in order to provide better service. Therefore, the facts of this case are
similar to that case of Synopsys International Ltd. Hence the ratio laid down
by the jurisdictional High Court in that case apply to the present case.

128\. It was emphatically argued by the learned Counsel for the assessee that
the payments made by the assessee under the AdWord Distributor Agreement was
in fact a business profit in the hands of the GIL as it was paid on account of
purchase of AdWord space,though the AdWord Advertisement space was further
sold to different advertisers. The nature of payment remains the same i.e.,
the payment for purchase of AdWord space. Thus it should be the business
profit in the hands of the GIL. It was further argued that there was no
transfer of technical know how or trade mark, intellectual property rights or
any process in favour of the appellant under the AdWord Distribution
Agreement. Therefore, the payment made under AdWord Distribution Agreement
cannot be termed to be payment of royalty and is chargeable to tax under
section 9(1)(vi) of the Act as deemed income accrued in India. Whereas,
according to Revenue, it was not a payment simpliciter towards the purchase of
AdWord space for its resale to advertisers. The payment was made after
deducting a particular percentage form the advertisement receipts,received
from the advertisers, though as per services agreement, the assessee has
rendered certain technical services but that too for the AdWord Programs only,
for which assessee has to receive certain payments as per terms of service
agreement from GIL. But the entire aspect is to be looked into in the light of
both the distribution agreement and service agreement and the obligations cast
upon the appellant IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 154 of 331
under Adword distribution agreement.According to Revenue, the after sales
services and the Ad review are not possible without the aid of ITES division.
Therefore, the payment made to GIL by the assessee was on account of usage of
their trade mark, intellectual property rights, process, derivative workss,
etc., and thus nature of payment is royalty.

129\. In order to adjudicate the nature of payment, we are required to examine
the AdWord Distributor Agreement and the Service Agreement. In foregoing
paras, we have already concluded that the AdWord Distributor Program and
Services Agreement are interconnected with the navel cord and they cannot be
segregated or separated. Without resorting to service agreement, the
obligation cast upon the assessee under the AdWord Distribution Agreement
cannot be fulfilled. Therefore, we have to examine the relevant clauses of the
AdWord Distributor Agreement and the Service Agreement. Under the AdWord
Distributor Agreement, the appellant was responsible for uploading all
advertisers' information that is required by Google for participation in the
AdWord Program. As per clause 2.3, the distributor shall provide after sales
service to the advertisers in accordance with the broad instructions, training
and standards of Google. The appellant's employees were also required to be
technically trained by the Google. As per clause 9.4, upon the termination or
the expiry of the agreement, all rights and licences granted by one party to
other including but not limited to use the other parties brand features shall
seize immediately and each party shall promptly return to the other party or
destroy and certify the destruction of all confidential information as defined
in the non-disclosure agreement and section 7 of this agreement on the other
party. The brand features and the confidential information has been defined in
this agreement and the same were also extracted in the foregoing paras of this
order according to which the brand features includes the title, interest and
intellectual property right relating to brand features and the confidential
information means the confidential information shared by IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 155 of 331 one party to other as per this
agreement meaning thereby under the AdWord Distributor Agreement, the
appellant has access to the confidential information, intellectual property
rights and the brand features of the GIL in order to provide effective
services under the AdWord Distributor Agreement. The technical services are
required to be provided by the appellant under the AdWord Distributor
Agreement as per services agreement, according to which the confidential
information means all data and information of confidential in nature including
technical know how and trade secrets relating to the business, the affairs,
the product, the development projects or the products or services of Google
Ireland or its suppliers or its affiliates including but not limited to
intellectual property rights andconfidential information be communicated
orally in writing or in any other recorded electronic or tangible forms.As per
the service agreement data and information shall be considered to be
confidential information. In the Service Agreement, derivative works is also
defined and it means for copy writable or copyrighted material, any
modifications, derivative works, translation, abridgment, revision of the form
in which such material may be recast, transmitted or adopted. The intellectual
property rights was also defined in the Services Agreement according to which
it means all intellectual, proprietaries and/or intangible property right
consulting, embodied in, pertaining to, used in or in respect of business of
Google Ireland, the products or the provision related to services and all
tangible embodiments thereof wherever located including but not limited to the
followings : (1) all trade marks, trade names, service mark, logos or trades
data bases including all registration and applications therefor.

(2) All copy rights, nodal rights as defined therein and other rights in works
of authorship including all registrations and applications therefor (3) All
patents and patent application patentable ideas, invention, innovations and
implements IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 156 of 331
(4) All know-how, trade secrets (5) All designs and code documentation,
methodologies, process, design information, etc.

130\. We have already reproduced relevant clauses of the service agreement in
the foregoing paras for reference. Therefore, we do no prefer to extract the
same again here while dealing with the issue. Under this service agreement,
ownership of intellectual property, confidential information, software
technologies, documentation shall remain the exclusive property of the Google
Ireland but the Google India, the appellant, was allowed under the licence to
use it in order to fulfil the obligations cast upon it under the AdWord
Distributor Agreement. Upon termination, either of the parties are required to
either destroy all copies of information, information, documentations and
other software embodiments in its possession or control and not to use the
same after the expiration or the termination of the agreement.

131\. From the careful perusal of this AdWord Distribution Agreement and the
Service Agreement, we find that appellant has not only purchased the
advertisement space from the GIL and resold it to the advertisers against
certain advertisement charges but the appellant was required to provide on
sale and post sale technical services to the advertiser and the GIL, which are
not possible without resorting the service agreement. In fact, the assessee
obtained the advertisement space under the AdWord Distribution Agreement and
resell it to different advertisers along with on sale and after sale services.
With the aid of ITES division, the appellant is required to execute the
programs and also provide all technical support to the advertisers and GIL. As
per the agreement with the advertisers, the advertisers are required to
approach only the appellant and not the GIL.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 157 of 331 Appellant is in fact
required to sort out all glitches to be faced by the advertisers while putting
the ads on the AdWord Program. Having examined functioning of the appellant
from the submission on behalf of the appellant and the revenue, the
literatures in the form of book viz., Learning AdWord and Google Analytics by
Benjamin Mangold and the snap shots placed before us, we find that Google
AdWord Program is a complex program or rather it can be called to be a portal
or software developed by Google Inc. While discharging its obligation under
the Google AdWord Programs and Service Agreement the appellant has an access
to the trade marks, IPRs, derivative works, brand features and the
confidential information of the GIL. Therefore, it cannot be called that
whatever payments were made by the appellant to GIL was simpliciter a payment
towards the purchase of AdWord space from the GIL for its resale to
advertisers.

132\. In order to examine whether this payment is a business profit of GIL or
it was a payment of royalty to GIL, we have to examine the definition of
royalty given in explanation below section 9(1)(vi) of the Act, according to
which the royalty means the consideration received for transfer of any rights
including the granting of licence in respect of patent, invention, model,
designs, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar property or for
imparting of any information concerning the working of or the use of patent,
invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar
property or use of any patent, invention, model, secret formula or process or
trade of mark or similar property, etc. For the sake of reference, we extract
the explanations below section 9(1)(vi) of the act as under:

"Explanation 2.--For the purposes of this clause, "royalty" means
consideration (including any lump sum consideration but excluding any
consideration which IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 158 of 331
would be the income of the recipient chargeable under the head "Capital
gains") for--

(i) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in
respect of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or
trade mark or similar property ;

(ii) the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or the use
of, a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade
mark or similar property ;

(iii) the use of any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or
process or trade mark or similar property ;

(iv) the imparting of any information concerning technical, industrial,
commercial or scientific knowledge, experience or skill ;

57

[(iva) the use or right to use any industrial, commercial or scientific
equipment58 but not including the amounts referred to in section 44BB;]

(v) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in
respect of's any copyright, literary, artistic or scientific work including
films or video tapes for use in connection with television or tapes for use in
connection with radio broadcasting, but not including consideration for the
sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic films ; or

(vi) the rendering of any services in connection with the activities referred
to in sub-clauses (i) to 57[( iv), (iva) and] (v).

"[Explanation 3.--For the purposes of this clause, "computer software"

> means any computer programme recorded on any disc, tape, perforated media or
> other information storage device and includes any such programme or any
> customized electronic data.] IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
> 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
> IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
> Page 159 of 331 60 [Explanation 4.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
> clarified that the transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right,
> property or information includes and has always included transfer of all or
> any right for use or right to use a computer software (including granting of
> a licence) irrespective of the medium through which such right is
> transferred. Explanation 5.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
> clarified that the royalty includes and has always included consideration in
> respect of any right, property or information, whether or not--

> (a)the possession or control of such right, property or information is with
> the payer;

(b) such right, property or information is used directly by the payer;

(c) the location of such right, property or information is in India.

Explanation 6--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
expression "process" includes and shall be deemed to have always included
transmission by satellite (including up-linking, amplification, conversion for
down-linking of any signal), cable, optic fibre or by any other similar
technology, whether or not such process- secret;]".

133\. As per explanation 3 below, section 9(1)(vi), the computer software
means any computer program recorded in disk, tape, perforated media or the
information storage, device and includes any such programme or customized
electronic data and as per explanation 5, the royalty includes the
consideration in respect of any right, property or information whether or not
the possession or control of such right, property or information is with the
payer, such right or property, information is used directly by the payer,
location of such property or information is in India. As per explanation 6,
the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 160 of 331
word process is also defined and shall be deemed to have included transmission
of satellite.

134\. Royalty is also defined under article 12 of Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement (DTAA) with Ireland. According to which, the term royalty means
payment of any kind received by consideration for use or right to use any
copyright of literary, artistic or scientific works including cinematograph
films or tapes used for video or television broadcasting, any patent, trade
mark, design or model plan, secret formula, process or for the use of or the
right to use industrial, commercial or scientific equipment. For the sake of
reference, we extract article 12 as under:

"ARTICLE 12 :ROYALTIES AND FEES FOR TECHNICAL SERVICES

1\. Royalties or fees for technical services arising in a Contracting State
and paid to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that
other State.

2\. However, such royalties or fees for technical services may also be taxed
in the Contracting State in which they arise, and according to the laws of
that State, but if the recipient is the beneficial owner of the royalties or
fees for technical services, the tax so charged shall not exceed 10 per cent
of the gross amount of the royalties or fees for technical services.

3\. (a) The term "royalties" as used in this Article means payments of any
kind received as a consideration for the use of, or the right to use, any
copyright of literary, artistic or scientific work including cinematograph
film or films or tapes for radio or television broadcasting, any patent, trade
mark, design or model, plan, secret formula or process or for the use of or
the right to use industrial, commercial or scientific equipment, other than an
aircraft, or for information concerning industrial, commercial or scientific
experience;

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 161 of 331

> (b) The term "fees for technical services" means payment of any kind in
> consideration for the rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy
> services including the provision of services by technical or other personnel
> but does not include payments for services mentioned in Articles 14 and 15
> of this Convention.

4\. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial
owner of the royalties or fees for technical services, being a resident of a
Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State in which
the royalties or fees for technical services arise through a permanent
establishment situated therein, or performs in that other State independent
personal services from a fixed base situated therein, and the right or
property in respect of which the royalties or fees for technical services are
paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment or fixed base.
In such case the provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be,
shall apply.

5\. Royalties or fees for technical services shall be deemed to arise in a
Contracting State when the payer is that State itself, a political sub-
division, a local authority or a resident of that State. Where, however, the
person paying the royalties or fees for technical services, whether he is a
resident of a Contracting State or not, has in a Contracting State a permanent
establishment or a fixed base in connection with which the liability to pay
the royalties or fees for technical services was incurred, and such royalties
or fees for technical services are borne by such permanent establishment or
fixed base, then such royalties or fees for technical services shall be deemed
to arise in the State in which the permanent establishment or fixed base is
situated.

6\. Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer and the
beneficial owner or between both of them and some other person, the amount of
the royalties or fees for technical services, having regard to the use, right
or information for which they are paid, exceeds the amount which would have
been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in the absence of such
relationship, the provisions of this Article shall IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 162 of 331 apply only to the last-mentioned
amount. In such case, the excess part of the payments shall remain taxable
according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard being had to the
other provisions of this Convention."

135\. If we examine the nature of services performed by the assesse with the
aid of ITES division we would find that the assessee has an access to patent,
technical know-how, IPRs, trade mark, the process, derivative works, brand
features, etc., of the GIL, therefore the payments of advertisement fees made
by the assesse after retaining a particular part of it to GIL is not the
payment simpliciter towards the purchase of AdWord space which may be treated
as business profit in the hands of the recipient but it is a payment of
royalty to the GIL in the light of definition of royalty given under the Act
and the DTAA. Therefore, we conclude that the payment made by the assesse to
GIL is a payment of royalty and as per provisions of section 9(1)(vi) of the
Act, it is an income deemed to accrue or arise in India.

136\. Ld counsel for the asseessee has also raised an argument that Royality
can only be taxed on receipt basis in the light of definition given in Article
12 of DTAA and not as per domestic law. In this regard.We have examined the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Palam Gas Service Vs. CIT [2017] 81
taxmann.com 43 (SC) referred to by the Revenue in which their Lordship have
examined the scope of provisions of section 40(a)(ia) in respect of word
payable occurring therein. Their Lordship having examined the various
provisions and have held that section 40(a)(ia) covers not only those cases
where the amount is payable but also when it is paid. In this behalf one has
to keep in mind the purpose with which section 40 was enacted and the
provisions of section 194C and 200 of the Act. Once it is found that the
aforesaid section mandates the person to deduct tax at source not only the
amount payable but also when the sums are actually IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 163 of 331 paid to the contractor, any person
who does not adhere to the statutory obligation has to suffer the consequences
which are stipulated in the Act itself. The relevant observation of their
Lordship is extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:

"15. We approve the aforesaid view as well. As a fortiorari, it follows that
Section 40(a)(ia) covers not only those cases where the amount is payable but
also when it is paid. In this behalf, one has to keep in mind the purpose with
which Section 40 was enacted and that has already been noted above. We have
also to keep in mind the provisions of Sections 194C and 200. Once it is found
that the aforesaid Sections mandate a person to deduct tax at source not only
on the amounts payable but also when the sums are actually paid to the
contractor, any person who does not adhere to this statutory obligation has to
suffer the consequences which are stipulated in the Act itself. Certain
consequences of failure to deduct tax at source from the payments made, where
tax was to be deducted at source or failure to pay the same to the credit of
the Central Government, are stipulated in Section 201 of the Act. This Section
provides that in that contingency, such a person would be deemed to be an
assessee in default in respect of such tax. While stipulating this
consequence, Section 201 categorically states that the aforesaid Sections
would be without prejudice to any other consequences which that defaulter may
incur. Other consequences are provided under Section 40(a)(ia) of the Act,
namely, payments made by such a person to a contractor shall not be treated as
deductible expenditure. When read in this context, it is clear that Section
40(a)(ia) deals with the nature of default and the consequences thereof.
Default is relatable to Chapter XVIIB (in the instant case Sections 194C and
200, which provisions are in the aforesaid Chapter). When the entire scheme of
obligation to deduct the tax at source and paying it over to the Central
Government is read holistically, it cannot be held that the word 'payable'
occurring in Section 40(a)(ia) refers to only those cases where the amount is
yet to be paid and does not cover the cases where the amount is actually paid.
If the provision is interpreted in the manner suggested by the appellant
herein, then even when it is found that a person, like the appellant, has
violated the provisions of Chapter XVIIB (or specifically Sections 194C and
200 in the instant case), he would still go scot free, without
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 164 of 331 suffering the
consequences of such monetary default in spite of specific provisions laying
down these consequences. The Punjab & Haryana High Court has exhaustively
interpreted Section 40(a(ia) keeping in mind different aspects. We would again
quote the following paragraphs from the said judgment, with our complete
approval thereto:

> "26. Further, the mere incurring of a liability does not require an assessee
> to deduct the tax at source even if such payments, if made, would require an
> assessee to deduct the tax at source. The liability to deduct tax at source
> under Chapter XVII-B arises only upon payments being made or where so
> specified under the sections in Chapter XVII, the amount is credited to the
> account of the payee. In other words, the liability to deduct tax at source
> arises not on account of the assessee being liable to the payee but only
> upon the liability being discharged in the case of an assessee following the
> cash system and upon credit being given by an assessee following the
> mercantile system. This is clear from every section in Chapter XVII.

> 27\. Take for instance, the case of an assessee, who follows the cash system
> of accounting and where the assessee who though liable to pay the
> contractor, fails to do so for any reason. The assessee is not then liable
> to deduct tax at source. Take also the case of an assessee, who follows the
> mercantile system. Such an assessee may have incurred the liability to pay
> amounts to a party. Such an assessee is also not bound to deduct tax at
> source unless he credits such sums to the account of the party/payee, such
> as, a contractor. This is clear from Section 194C set out earlier. The
> liability to deduct tax at source, in the case of an assessee following the
> cash system, arises only when the payment is made and in the case of an
> assessee following the mercantile system, when he credits such sum to the
> account of the party entitled to receive the payment.

> 28\. The government has nothing to do with the dispute between the assessee
> and the payee such as a contractor. The provisions of the Act including
> Section 40 and the provisions of Chapter XVII do not entitle the tax
> authorities to adjudicate the liability of an assessee to make payment to
> the payee/other contracting party. The appellant's submission, if accepted,
> would require an adjudication by the tax authorities as to the
> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 165 of 331 liability of the
> assessee to make payment. They would then be required to investigate all the
> records of an assessee to ascertain its liability to third parties. This
> could in many cases be an extremely complicated task especially in the
> absence of the third party. The third party may not press the claim. The
> parties may settle the dispute, if any. This is an exercise not even
> remotely required or even contemplated by the section."

16\. As mentioned above, the Punjab & Haryana High Court found support from
the judgments of the Madras and Calcutta High Courts taking identical view and
by extensively quoting from the said judgments.

17\. Insofar as judgment of the Allahabad High Court is concerned, reading
thereof would reflect that the High Court, after noticing the fact that since
the amounts had already been paid, it straightaway concluded, without any
discussion, that Section 40(a)(ia) would apply only when the amount is
'payable' and dismissed the appeal of the Department stating that the question
of law framed did not arise for consideration. No doubt, the Special Leave
Petition thereagainst was dismissed by this Court in limine. However, that
would not amount to confirming the view of the Allahabad High Court (See V.M.
Salgaocar & Bros. (P) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, (2000) 243 ITR 383
and Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, (1989) 4
SCC 187.

18\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that the view taken by the
High Courts of Punjab & Haryana, Madras and Calcutta is the correct view and
the judgment of the Allahabad High Court in CIT v. Vector Shipping Services
(P) Ltd., (2013) 357 ITR 642 did not decide the question of law correctly.
Thus, insofar as the judgment of the Allahabad High Court is concerned, we
overrule the same. Consequences of the aforesaid discussion will be to answer
the question against the appellant/assessee thereby approving the view taken
by the High Court".

137\. Our attention was also invited to judgment of the Bombay High Court in
the case of Director (International Taxation) Vs. Siemens aktiengesellschaft
(supra) in ITA IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 166 of 331
No. 124/2000 in which the Hon'ble High Court has upheld the view taken by the
Tribunal holding that the royalty and fees of technical services should be
taxed on receipt basis. We have also examined the order of the Tribunal in the
case of Saira Asia Interiors Pvt. Ltd., Vs. ITO (supra) and Naitonal Organic
Chemicals Vs. DCIT in which it was held that under the related DTAA, tax
liability can only arise at the point of payment and the income embedded in
the payment is not taxable at the point of time of crediting the amount.

138\. In order to adjudicate an issue of chargeability of tax on royalty we
have examined the provisions of section 9(1)(vi) of the Act according to
which, it shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India when it has become
payable by a person who is resident of India. Whereas as per article 12 of
DTAA, the royalty means payment of any kind received as consideration for the
use of or the right to use any copyright of literary, artistic scientific work
including cinematograph films etc. It was emphatically argued by Sr. Advocate
Mr. Percy Pardiwala that wherever there is a conflict between the domestic law
and DTAA, the provisions of DTAA will only prevail. Therefore, royalty only
means when it is received as consideration for the use of or the right to use
any copyright of literary, artistic, etc. We have also examined the judgment
referred to by the parties on this issue and we find that it has to be taxed
on receipt basis but in the instant case, the nature of AdWord Agreement and
the Service Agreement is quite complexed. Under the Service Agreement,
assessee would be paid by the GIL whereas under AdWord Agreement, the
appellant is required to make payment of advertisement charges after deducting
a particular percentage to the GIL. Though the assessee has contended that
ITES division is exclusively involved in providing technical services to GIL
as per the Services Agreement and its marketing division is involved in
providing services as per AdWord IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 167 of 331 Program but in order the examine the actual services rendered
by the appellant under the AdWord Program, one has to read both the agreements
together. In the foregoing paras, we have already adjudicated and concluded
that both these agreements are connected with the navel cord and they cannot
be segregated. Therefore, both the agreements are to be read together in order
to find out the actual functioning of the appellant, as held by jurisdictional
High Court in the case of Synopsys International Ltd., (supra) that it is
necessary to look into the terms of the agreement entered into between the
parties as it would be purely question of fact to be decided on the basis of
the intention of the parties as could be gathered from the written words used
in the agreement. During the course of hearing, our attention was also invited
to return filed by the GIL for the assessment year 2009-10 in which the GIL
has shown its method of accounting as mercantile system of accounting. Once
the GIL has itself has declared the method of accounting as mercantile system
it cannot claim that for the purpose of royalty, system of accounting should
be on cash/reciept basis. Moreover, the adjustment entries are to made in the
books of accounts of the appellant as well as GIL with regard to the payment
under Service Agreement and AdWord Program Agreement. It is also an admitted
fact that in view of clause 6.1 of EXHIBIT-A attached to Distributor
agreement, payments are to be made during the year on short intervals and the
final trued-up payment on the basis of audited accounts of GIL. The appellant
could not demonstrate that the royalty was not paid to or received by the GIL
and it was simply credited to its accounts in the books of accounts of the
appellant. Under these situations, we do not find any merit in the contentions
of the assessee that royalty cannot be taxed in the impugned assessment year
as it was not received by the GIL and therefore is not chargeable to tax in
India as a deemed income accrued. Since the payment made under the
distribution agreement to GIL by the appellant is held to be the payment of
royalty, appellant is required to deduct the TDS on such payment.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 168 of 331

139\. On the point of equalization levy, we find that by the Finance Act,
2016, equalization levy was introduced and as per its definition, equalization
levy means tax leviable on consideration received or receivable for any
services specified under the provisions of the chapter. They have also defined
specified service which means online advertisement, any provision for digital
advertisement space or any other facility of service for the purpose of online
advertisement and includes any other services as may be notified by the
Central Government in this behalf. It was further clarified that from the date
of the commencement there shall be charge on equalization levy @ 6% on the
amount of consideration for any specified services received or receivable by a
person being a non-resident from a person resident in India carried on
business or profession or non-resident having a permanent establishment in
India. Meaning thereby, the Legislature has introduced the equalization levy
to tax the considerations paid by resident to a non-resident who is not having
a permanent establishment in India. No doubt, it may be business profit in the
hands of the recipient and the Legislature intend to tax the business profit
as it has arisen out of the activities performed in India. But it does not
effect other kind of services in which technology,the know-how, copyrights or
IPRs are involved. From this argument, the learned Counsel for the assessee
intend to demonstrate that since the intention of the Legislature to treat the
payment by the advertisers to the non-resident is a business profit in the
hands of the recipient the same should be treated in other cases also where
the payments are made by the residents to non-residents for a consideration of
use of technical know-how, IPRs, copyrights, derivative workss and other
intangibles. But we do not find any merit in this argument as the equilization
levy is to charged only on consideration for specified services and not others
where there is use of IPR, copyright and other intangibles. In the instant
case, under AdWord Distribution and Service Agreement, the appellant has
acquired licence to use IPRs, copyright and other intangibles to provide
better services either to GIL or IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 169 of 331 to advertisers. Therefore, the introduction of equilisation
levy would not convert the nature of payment made by the appellant to GIL.

140\. With regard to another limb of argument of the learned Counsel for the
assessee that in providing a space on Google AdWord Program to the
advertisers, the trade mark or the GIL was not involved therefore
consideration paid by the appellant to GIL is not royalty, we find that the
AdWord was registered with the Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai in the name
Google Inc., but the programme is known as Google AdWord Program owned by the
Google Inc., under which GIL has provided space to appellant for its sale to
the various advertisers. The learned Counsel for the assessee in this regard
has contended that if the trade mark is used as incidental to the main
activity, it cannot be called that there was a transfer of trade mark or
licence to use the trade mark. In support of his contention, he has invited
our attention to the judgment of Delhi High Court in the case of Director of
Income Tax Vs. Sherton Internaitonal Inc., (2009) 178 Taxmann 84 Delhi and on
its perusal we find that assessee company is incorporated in USA and non-
resident under the Indian Tax Laws. The assessee is engaged in providing
services to hotels in various parts of the world. On 27.01.1979 the assessee
entered into one such agreement with ITC Ltd., for providing services to 3 of
its hotels i.e., Welcome Group Mourya Sherton, New Delhi, Welcome Group Mugal
Sherton, Agra and Welcome Group, Chhola, Sherton Madras. The scope of services
envisaged in the agreement was publicity, advertisement and sales including
reservation services. In consideration of the services which the assessee was
required to render, ITC Ltd., agreed to pay a fee @ 3% of the room sales to
the assessee. According to Revenue what the assessee was making available to
the ITC hotels was technical and consultancy service; provision of training to
its employees' the use of its trade mark (even though they were free of cost,
these were services according to him linked to the trade mark), making
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 170 of 331 available the
technical know-how, documentation and manuals for which while the assessee was
not charging a lumpsum fees the consideration received by the assessee was
relatable to the business concluded by its client-hotels and the reservation
network. Based on these observations, the AO has concluded that assessee had a
business connection with India and hence fees received on account of services
rendered by the assessee were deemed to accrue or arise in India and therefore
assessee's case was covered under section 9 of the Act. While adjudicating the
issue CIT(A) has classified services rendered by the assessee into three
categories. According to the CIT(A), the fee received by the assessee for the
followingthree categories constituted payment of royalty under article
12(3)(a) of the DTAA; " (1) use of trade mark, trade name and the stylized S
service mark, even though the agreement allowed its use at no cost it being a
colourable device the payment received by the assessee had to be attributed to
the user of the said intangible assets ;2) Payments towards reservation
service and "(3) lastly payments towards maintenance of high international
standards." In respect of last category of service which were in the nature of
publicity, marketing and promotion activities and had been rendered outside
India, according to CIT(A), they constitute a commercial income and in the
absence of PE in India the said payments could not be brought to tax.

141\. The matter was carried to the Tribunal and the Tribunal examined the
arguments and the related nature of services and came to the conclusion that
the main service rendered by the assessee to its client was advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion,keeping in mind the mutual interest and in that
context, the use of trade mark, trade name or the stylized 'S' or other
illuminated sereivces referred in the agreement with the assessee were
incidental to the main service. Accordingly, Tribunal has held
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 171 of 331 that payment received
was neither in the nature of royalty under section 9(1)(vi) read with
explanation 2 nor in the nature of fee for technical service under article 12
of the DTAA. The Revenue went in appeal before the Hon'ble High Court and the
Hon'ble High Court has confirmed the view of the Tribunal.

142\. In the instant case, appellant was not engaged in the advertisement,
publicity of any particular activities of the GIL. Appellant was appointed as
a distributor under the AdWord Distribution Agreement with certain obligations
towards the advertisers and the GIL and that obligations cannot be fulfilled
without the aid of ITES division and having access to the IPRs, technical
know-how, trade mark, derivative workss and other intangibles of the GIL. Thus
the facts of the aforesaid case and that of the appellant's case are entirely
different. Therefore the ratio laid down in that case will not be applicable
in the present case.

143\. We have also been carried through other judgments of Delhi High Court in
the case of Formula One World Championship Ltd., Vs. CIT (Supra) and from its
perusal we find that assessee i.e., Formula One World Championship Ltd., was a
UK tax resident company. Consequent to the agreement entered into between the
Federation Internationale Automobile (FIA an International Motor Sports Event
Regulating Association) Formula One Asset Management Ltd., (FOAM) and FOWC,
FOAM licenced all commercial rights in FIA Formula One World Championship
(Championship)to FOWC for hundred years terms effecting from 01.01.2011.
Assessee entered into risk promotion contract (RPC) dated 13.09.2011 by which
it granted to Jaypee Sports right (Right) to host, stage and promote formula
one, Grand Prix of India, event foraconsideration of USD 40 millions and art
work licence agreement (ALA) contemplated in RPC was also entered into between
the FOWC and the Jaypee the same IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 172 of 331 day i.e., 13.09.2011 permitting the use of certain marks and
intellectual property belonging to FOWC for a consideration of USD 1. Every F1
racing event is hosted, promoted and staged by a promoter with whom FOWC as
the a right holder enters into contract and whose event is nominated by the
CRH (a contract right holder which in effect FOWC) to the FIA for inclusion in
the official F1 racing calendar. In other words FOWC an exclusive nominating
body at whose instance the event promoter is permitted participation.

144\. The FOWC and Jaypee Sports both approached the AAR on issue whether the
payment of consideration receivable by FOWC outside India in terms of RPC from
Jaypee was or was not royalty as defined in article 13 India-UK DTAA. The AAR
having examined the contents of the agreement in the light of rival
submissions have concluded that firstly the amount paid was royalty secondly
FOWC had no fixed place of business nor was doing any business activity in
India and had not authorized any organization or entity to conclude contracts
on their behalf and therefore had no PE in India. The assessee moved to the
High Court against both the observations of the AAR and with regard to
question whether the payment made by Jaypee to FOWC is in the nature of
royalty under DTAA for the use of later's trade mark. The Hon'ble High Court
has examined the facts of the case and have come to the conclusion that from
the tenure of the agreement, the main purpose of the RPC is not for grant of
trade mark rights or privilege or licence to use, and the payment made to it
under RPC are not the royalty either in the Act or the DTAA, they most
certainly are not for the use of the trade mark or the IP rights, but rather
for the grant of privilege of staging, hosting and promoting the event at the
promoters racing circuit in Noida. The relevant observation of the Hon'ble
High Court are extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 173 of 331 " 65. FOWC and
> Jaypee argue that the rights given to the latter under the RPC was the grant
> of a bundle of rights the basic objective of which were to enable it, as the
> promoter to stage a motor racing event in India at its circuit, the Buddh
> International Circuit, that would be an official round of the FIA Formula
> One World Championship, in which all participant teams and drivers in that
> Championship would therefore compete. The permission to use the F1 marks for
> purposes limited to advertising the Event was incidental to the grant of
> that principal right to enable hosting of the event. They also argue that
> under the terms of the RPC and the ALA Jaypee had no independent right of
> commercial exploitation of the marks. Therefore, the two independent
> contracting parties agreed that no consideration was payable to FOWC in
> relation to the use of the marks. Though the right included the right to
> name the event specifically, it was predominantly in the nature of a pure
> commercial right. It was argued that the payment to FOWC was the dominant
> purpose of securing the right to "put on" (i.e. host, stage and promote) at
> its circuit and as its own commercial venture, an official round of a
> globally popular international sporting series. The consideration was not
> paid for the use of any copyright, trademark or other intellectual property
> mentioned in the definition of 'royalty', whether W.P.(C) 10307/2016,
> W.P.(C) 9509/2016 & W.P.(C) 10145/2016 Page 56 under second Explanation to
> Section 9(1)(vi) of the Act or Article 13(3) of the India-UK DTAA. The ALA
> was incidental to and a mere consequence of the RPC. Its purpose was to
> ensure that the use of Fl and related marks would be strictly controlled and
> limited to the sole purpose of promoting the event(s), and that Jaypee and
> other third parties would not be permitted to use the marks in connection
> with any other unauthorized activity or commercial venture that could damage
> or dilute the reputation and prestige of the Championship. FOWC and Jaypee
> therefore urge that the AAR‟s finding that the payment amounted to "royalty"
> is contrary to law. They argue that the AAR also erred in distinguishing and
> not following Sheraton(supra). The revenue on the other hand, supports the
> AAR‟s conclusions and findings; it urges that the terms of the ALA and the
> RPC clearly show that the payment of US$ 40 million was to enable Jaypee the
> use of the F1 trademark and logo; they point out that these marks figured
> prominently in the trackside advertisements and the tickets that were
> printed. The use of the logo, to promote the event, IT(IT)ANos.1190,
> 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013,
> 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
> IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 174 of 331 therefore meant use of the F1
> marks. The nomenclature or terms of an agreement are not always
> determinative of the true nature of the transaction; in this case, it
> clearly was to permit the use of the F1 mark. The character of the event
> would have been different had the F1 marks not been used by Jaypee. It was
> held that the popularity of the event is a result only of the use of the
> Marks, and that without those marks it would not enjoy its popularity
> otherwise.

66\. Under trademark law, particularly in India, trademark use even for
advertisement purposes is to be preceded by prior consent of the proprietor
and any unauthorized use of the trademark without such prior permission of the
proprietor could lead to an infringement of the trademark (in India, under
section 29 of the Trade Marks Act,1999). To secure registration for the marks
in India from the Trademark Registry, FOWC and Jaypee entered into the ALA.
The function of the ALA was (a) to provide for a strictly limited usage of the
marks i.e. only for advertisement and promotion of the Indian Grand Prix
Event; (b) to provide for restrictions on usage of such marks, i.e. not for
any commercial purposes such as use on merchandise, etc.

67\. The grant of a right, in the form of license to use the trademark is
primarily to be utilized in the licensee‟s product. In a typical case of
licensing, the trademark proprietor W.P.(C) 10307/2016, W.P.(C) 9509/2016 &
W.P.(C) 10145/2016 Page 57 does not wish to mark its products in an area; it
licenses the mark, to be used by the licensee‟s products, subject to
limitations. The licensee has no right to initiate legal proceedings, in the
event of infringement, unless specifically authorized; the property in the
mark always vests with the owner. Even the use of the mark by the licensee
inures to the owner, as the latter‟s continuous use, in terms of Section 48 of
the Trademarks Act. Typically, therefore when a trade vendor or establishment
sells branded goods, it is incorrect to state that the income earned by the
vendor is generated from the brand or mark, associated with the product,
rather than from sale of the product itself. It would be incorrect therefore,
to conclude that income earned is not from the sale of the product, but from
marketing intangibles connected with the reputation of the mark, though that
reputation guarantees a high demand for the product, from which the seller
benefits. Likewise, in the case of distribution, a distribution agent is under
an agreement with the manufacturer to sell its good; it also possesses the
right to advertise the goods and brands of the manufacturer.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 175 of 331 This implies a
license of the manufacturer‟s trademark. In such an event, the distributor
need not pay for the right to use the intellectual property under which the
goods are sold; he merely pays for obtaining the exclusive commercial right to
sell the goods he buys from the manufacturer for enabling onward sale.

68\. Para 10.1 of OECD commentary on Article 12 of the Model Convention states
that payments solely made in consideration for obtaining the exclusive
distribution rights of a product or service in a given territory are not
royalty, since the resident distributor does not pay for the right to use the
trade name or trade mark under which the products are sold but merely obtains
the exclusive right to sell in his state of residence the product that he is
agreeing to buy from the manufacturer; such payments will be characterized as
business income.

69\. It is relevant here to consider the conditions in the RPC and the ALA,
which FOWC entered into with Jaypee. Under recital B to the RPC, FOWC clearly
has the exclusive right to exploit the commercial rights in the championship
and to award Jaypee the right to host, stage and promote F1 Grand Prix events.
Clause 17, states that FOWC would through reasonable endeavors ensure that at
least sixteen cars participate in the Event. Clause 18 forbids Jaypee from
making any audio or visual image of the event;

W.P.(C) 10307/2016, W.P.(C) 9509/2016 & W.P.(C) 10145/2016 Page 58 likewise
there are restrictions in clause 19 of the RPC. Clause 23.2 permits FOWC to
make incidental use of I.P. rights solely for the limited purpose of
facilitating Jaypee to promote the event. Under the RPC Jaypee remains liable
to pay the full contractual amount in the year of termination and in the
subsequent year, the right to use trademarks, logos and IP Rights ceases
instantly, the moment termination takes place. This is a strong pointer to the
fact that the amounts payable by Jaypee to FOWC under the RPC are really for
the privilege of hosting and staging the championship race and not for the IP
rights, which in any event, could be utilized by it only to promote the race
and for no other purpose.

70\. Clauses 23.3 and 23.4 of the RPC are to be read in conjunction with the
ALA. The ALA does not confer any additional rights, neither was a license nor
any form of right to use the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 176 of 331 trademark given to Jaypee by FOWC which resulted in royalty
payment within the meaning of Article 13 of the DTAA.

71\. The judgment in Director of Income Tax v. Ericsson A.B. [2012] 343 ITR
470 (Del), held that a lump-sum payment which is not based on or connected
with the extent of the user of the IP rights would not constitute "royalties"
within the meaning of the DTAA. In the present case, the payments made under
the RPC were separate lump-sum amounts in respect of the three separate race
events held in each of the three (3) years 2011 to 2013. It is not a payment,
which is based on either the number of tickets sold or the total amount of
revenue earned by Jaypee in each of the said years or indeed on any other
measure. In the present case, the lump sum payable to FOWC by Jaypee would
likewise, not constitute royalties. Importantly, recital (B) of the ALA
specifically stated that FOWC wished to grant a license to Jaypee permitting
only the incidental use of certain IP rights and artwork "solely for the
limited purpose of facilitating the hosting, staging and promotion of the
event". The definition of "permitted use" in clause 1.1 of the ALA states that
it means only the incidental use of the licensed marks and materials "for the
purpose of hosting, staging or promoting the event, but for the avoidance of
doubt, not to include use for any merchandising or other products or services
whatsoever, whether distributed free of charge or for sale". Clauses 2.2 and
6.2 of the ALA provide that the ALA will continue only until the RPC
terminates or expires; Clause 2.3 of the ALA W.P.(C) 10307/2016, W.P.(C)
9509/2016 & W.P.(C) 10145/2016 Page 59 prohibits Jaypee from using any of the
licensed marks, or as part of the name of the circuit, any corporate name, any
domain name, website address or other URL identification or equivalent used in
association with Jaypee. Jaypee thus has no IP rights whatsoever independently
of the staging and hosting of the event. The undertakings given by Jaypee, set
out in Clauses 3.1(e) and 3.6 of the ALA too reinforce this conclusion. These
are strong indications that the parties did not intend, through the RPC and
the ALA, to license the trademark. Thus, it does not amount to royalty under
the DTAA. The court is in agreement with FOWC‟s position on the definition of
"royalty" as set out in the second Explanation to Section 9(1)(vi) of the Act;
it is significantly broader than the definition of "royalties" set out in
Article 13(3) of the India-UK DTAA. The definition in the Act IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 177 of 331 specifically covers and includes
lump-sum payments, whereas Article 13(3) of the DTAA only refers to payments.

72\. The impugned order neither contains any discussion nor finding whatsoever
on this crucial issue even though it goes to the root of the entire case. The
entire tenor of the agreement- even the main purpose of the RPC, is not for
the grant of trademark rights or privilege or license to use. The payments
made to it under the RPC are not "royalty" either under the Act or the DTAA,
they most certainly are not for the use of trademarks or IP rights, but rather
for the grant of the privilege of staging, hosting and promoting the Event at
the promoter's racing circuit in Noida(NCR). FOWC under the RPC, made
available to Jaypee all of the elements which constitute the event. In
particular, this includes nominating (to FIA) the promoter's event for
inclusion in the official F1 racing calendar; after such inclusion the F1
racing teams with their F1 cars and drivers were bound to participate in
Jaypee's event held at the Promoter's racing circuit, strictly in conformity
with the requirements of the F1 Sporting and Technical Regulations and the FIA
Sporting Code. Therefore, the grant of F1 rights by the FOWC to Jaypee is
merely incidental to the hosting and staging of the event by it, and this is
clear from the fact that the use of rights by Jaypee has been strictly
confined and limited to use only for the promotion of the event, and for no
other purpose and in no other manner whatsoever. "

145\. But in the instant case, assessee is not involved in advertisement
activities of GIL and for same reasons as discussed in the foregoing para, we
are of the view that since the facts are not similar to the facts of the
appellant's case, the ratio laid down in this case would not apply to the
present case.

146\. With regard to the bonafide belief of the appellant we find that the
agreements relating to Google AdWord Program i.e., Google AdWord Distributor
Agreement and IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 178 of 331
Service Agreement were prepared in such a way to give a different colour of
transaction, whereas under the Google AdWord Program, the Appellant is
required to sell the ad space to the Advertiser with the technical support
onsale and post sale and the technical support to the Advertisers are not
possible without the use of technical know-how, IPR, derivative workss,
intangibles, information and copyrights owned by the GIL or its parent
holdings. Since the appellant has access to technical know-how, IPRs,
derivative workss, intangibles, information and copyrights of the GIL or its
parent holdings, the payment made in lieu of that is certainly a payment of
royalty on which appellant is required to deduct TDS. These facts were known
to the appellant since the execution of both the agreements. Therefore, it
cannot be said that appellant was under the bonafide belief for non-dedcution
of TDS. The facts in the case of Kotak Securities Ltd.(supra), are different
as in that case the appellant was under bonafide belief with regard to nature
of payments as no dispute was ever raised by the Revenue in earlier years. But
in the instant case, the appellant was aware of the nature of payments since
the execution of agreements at different points of time as to what kind of
services were required to be provided by the appellant to the GIL under the
Google AdWord Program and the Revenue has disputed the nature of claim raised
by the appellant since beginning.

Therefore, the ratio laid down in the case of Kotak Securities will not apply
to the present facts of the case.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 179 of 331

147\. We have also carefully examined the judgment of the Apex Court in the
case of GE India Technology Cen. Pvt. Ltd., Vs. CIT 327 ITR 456, CIT Vs. Eli
Lilly and Co., (India) Pvt. Ltd., (supra) and Transmission Corporation of AP
Ltd., Vs. CIT (supra), in which it has been repeatedly held that liability of
deducting tax at source is in the nature of vicarious liability which pre-
supposes existence of primary liability, the said liability is a vicarious
liability and the principal liability is of the person who is taxable. It was
also observed in those judgments that the plea of bonafide belief cannot be
taken for non-deducting of TDS when it is clear that TDS is required to be
deducted as per section 195 of the Act. The plea of bonafide belief can only
be considered while adjudicating the issue of penalty to be levied under
section 271C of the Act.

148\. In the case of GE IndiaTechnology Cen. Pvt. Ltd., (supra), their
Lordship of Apex Court have held that section 195 imposes a statutory
obligation on any person responsible for paying to a non-resident any interest
(not being interest on securities) or any other sum (not being dividend)
chargeable under the provisions of the Act to deduct income tax at the rate in
force unless is liable to pay income tax thereon as an agent. It was further
held that payment to non-resdients by way of royalty and payment for
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 180 of 331 technical services
rendered in India are common examples for sums chargeable under the provisions
of Income Tax Act, to which the aforesaid requirement of tax deduction at
source applies. The tax so collected and deducted is required to be paid to
the credit of Central Government in terms of section 200 r.w.r. 30 of the
Income Tax Rules, 1962.

We have carefully examined the facts of the instant case in the light of
various judicial pronouncements referred here in above and the AdWord
Distributor Agreement and the Service Agreement together and we find that
under these agreements assessee was licenced to use the trade marks, IPRs,
brand features, derivative workss and other intangibles etc, though it may not
be transferred in favour of the appellant.Therefore the consideration paid by
the assessee is on account of usage of all these intangibles in order to
provide better services to the GIL or to the advertisers is certainly in the
nature of payment of royalty and is chargeable to tax under section 9(1)(vi)
of the Act and under article 12 of the DTAA. Since the assessee has not
deducted the tax at source as per provisions of section 195 of the Act,
assessee was rightly held to be in default under section 201(1) of the Act. We
therefore confirm the order of the CIT(A) upholding the ordert of the AO
passed under section 201(1) and 201(1A) of the Act in this regard.

149\. IT(IT) A No. 1295/Bang/2014 Through this appeal, the revenue has
assailed the order of CIT(Appeals) inter alia on the following grounds:-

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 181 of 331 "1. The learned CIT
> (Appeals) has erred in partly allowing the appeal of the assessee which is
> opposed to law, equity, facts and circumstances of the case.

> 2\. The learned CIT (A) erred in fact by not appreciating the Assessing
> Officer's conclusion based on the material available on the record that the
> Google Ireland Limited (GIL) is not the beneficial owner of the Royalties
> paid by the Google India Private Ltd(GIPL)

> 3\. The learned CIT (A) erred in fact and law by holding that the M/s.Google
> Ireland Limited (GIL) is the beneficial owner of the royalties paid by the
> GIPL and the rate of TDS is at 10.556%.

> 4\. The learned CIT (A) erred in not appreciating the reliance of the AO in
> the statement made under Oath before the Public Accounts Committee, House of
> Commons, British Parliament by Mr. Matt Brittin of Google UK Ltd and the
> various articles appearing in WWW,which shows that the transaction of
> assessee company constitutes a colourable device.

> 5\. The learned CIT (A) erred by not considering the fact that onus is on
> the assessee to establish with the reliable documentary evidence that the
> recipient (GIL) is the beneficial owner of royalty.

> 6\. The learned CIT (A) has not appreciated the Assessing Officer's reliance
> on the agreements entered between the entities to decide the beneficial
> owner of the Royalties which were neither produced before the AO nor the
> Ld.CIT(A)."

150\. Though various grounds are raised, but they all relate to the issue as
to whether GIL is the beneficial owner of the payment received in the form of
royalty.

150\. We have carefully examined the orders of the lower authorities and we
find that the AO has taxed the royalty @ 10.56% (including education cess and
surcharge) under IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 182 of 331
section 115A of the Act having rejected the contention of the assessee that
GIL is the beneficial owner of the royalty and royalty will be taxed at 10% as
per Article 12 of DTAA.

151\. The assessment order was challenged before the CIT(Appeals) in AY
2013-14 and the CIT(Appeals) has accepted the contention of the assessee and
has held that GIL, the recipient of royalty, is the beneficial owner,
therefore royalty will be taxed at 10% only; and this order of CIT(Appeals) is
challenged before us.

152\. In other succeeding years i.e. AYs 2014-15 & 2015-16, the assessment
order denying the benefit of beneficial ownership to GIL was approved by the
CIT(Appeals) and the assessee is in appeal before us in ITA no 949& 958
/Bang/17 against the confirmation of the order of the AO. Therefore, we have
to adjudicate the issue in the light of evidence placed before the lower
authorities and also before us. While disallowing the claim of assessee, the
AO has examined the concept of beneficial ownership and the surrounding
circumstances and also in the light of tax residency certificate issued by the
revenue authorities to GIL. The AO has examined the concept of beneficial
ownership in the light of UK Trust of Laws and UN Model of Convention and was
of the view that the object of this concept is to identify the true owner of
income or asset with ultimate rights of enjoyment. There is no definition
available either under IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 183 of 331 UN Model of Convention or under domestic tax laws of India.
The AO further observed that the concept of beneficial ownership was
introduced in the tax treaties as a counter measure against the treaty
shopping to confine bargain only to the contracting states which were intended
to benefit from the treaty. The concept of beneficial ownership is a tool to
protect the bargain between the two contracting states. None of the country
would intend to relinquish its tax base without getting something back for it.
The beneficial owner is used to confine the bargain to the parties who were
intended to benefit from it.

153\. The AO further noticed in India-Ireland treaty that the treaty does not
use the general term 'owner', but uses specific term 'beneficial owner'.
Therefore treaty intends to give benefit of withholding tax at the reduced
rates only to the person who can be loosely described as a 'final' owner of
income. The concept of final owner of income can be elaborated with the help
of attributes of ownership of income. The AO further observed that income
ownership has several attributes such as right to possess, use or manage
income, power to alienate and ability to consume waste or destroy, the risk of
depreciation and hope of appreciation. It is possible to split these
attributes among different persons by entering into a legal or contractual
arrangement to avail benefit of the favourable treaty without losing ownership
of income. Therefore, beneficial owner is the one who has more attributes of
ownership of income than others. He further placed IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 184 of 331 reliance upon the explanation by
Charles Du Toit describing that beneficial owner is the person whose ownership
attributes outweighs those of any other person. Besides he has also placed a
reliance on the Bulletin for International Taxation, Vol. 64 (2010) no.10,
pages 500 - 509.

154\. During the course of assessment proceedings, the AO has asked the
assessee to furnish evidence in support of its claim that GIL is the
beneficial owner of the royalties payable by GIPL. In response thereto, the
assessee has filed a Tax Residency Certification (TRC) issued by the revenue
authorities of Ireland and the financial statements of GIL for the year ending
31.12.2012. Reliance was also placed upon the statement of Finance Minister on
01.03.2013 in which it was clarified that TRC produced by the resident of the
contracting state will be accepted as evidence that the person is a resident
of that contracting state and the income-tax authorities will not go behind
the TRC to question the resident status of that person. The AO was not
convinced with the explanation furnished by the assessee and he observed that
TRC of GIL has never been questioned. The GIPL was asked to prove whether GIPL
is the beneficial owner of amounts payable by GIPL under Article 12 of the
treaty. The AO further observed that TRC is essential to prove that person is
a resident of a contracting state in order to claim the treaty benefits. He
has also examined the statement of Hon'ble Finance Minister on the proposed
insertion of section 90A(5) and noted that TRC certifies that you are a
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 185 of 331 resident, but it does
not certify you are a beneficial owner. The AO has also examined the different
layers of holdings involved in these transactions. The legal owner of
Intellectual Property (IP) in the Adword program is Google Inc. USA , which
has in turn given the rights to use the IP in the Adwords program to the group
entity Google Ireland Holdings (GIH). GIH in turn by license agreement given
the rights to use the Adwords program to Google Netherlands Holding, BV
(GNHBV), a Netherlands based subsidiary, for which GNHBV pays royalty to GIH.
GNHBV in turn by license agreement has given the rights to use the Adwords
program to GIL for which GIL pays royalty to GNHBV. The AO has depicted the
relationship diagram in his order and for the sake of reference, we extract
the same hereunder:-

> Google In. USA Google Ireland Holdings Google Netherlands Holdings BV Google
> Ireland Limited Google India Private Ltd IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
> 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
> 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
> No.387/Bang/2017  Page 186 of 331

155\. The AO accordingly asked the assessee to furnish (1) the agreement
between GNHBV and GIL, (2) the agreement between GIH and GNHBV, and (3) the
agreement between Google Inc. and GIH; but the assessee did not furnish the
copies of agreement before the AO and the AO observed that it would be
difficult to accept the claim that GIL is the beneficial owner of royalties
payable by GIPL to GIL as the terms and conditions under which GIL was given
the licensing rights over Adwords program is not known. He further observed
that GIL is an operational company, but this fact alone is not sufficient to
state that GIL is the beneficial owner of the amounts paid/payable by GIPL. In
the absence of these agreements, the AO has examined the various material on
the Google group in the World Wide Web in order to understand the relationship
between different entities of the Google group. He has also examined the
Nineteenth report of Session 2012-13 of House of Commons, Committee of Public
Accounts in which the Committee has recorded the explanation furnished by
Google and the statement of Mr. Matt Brittin, Google's Vice President for
Sales & Operations in Northern & Central Europe, summoned by Public Accounts
Committee and took note that profits derived by GIL are transferred to entity
GIH which is controlled and managed from Bermuda, a tax haven. The relevant
observations of the AO are extracted hereunder for the sake of reference:-

> "The transactions of Google UK Ltd in relation to distribution of Adword
> program in UK were analysed by the Public Accounts Committee, House of
> Common of the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
> IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
> 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 187 of 331
> United Kingdom. Mr. Matt Brittin, Google's Vice President for Sales and
> Operations in Northern and Central Europe, was summoned by the Public
> Account Committee and his statements were recorded under Oath. The
> deposition of the Chie Executive Officer of Google UK Ltd forms part of the
> report of the House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts, FIMRC Annual
> Report 2011-12, Nineteenth Report of Session 2012-13, dated 28th Nov 2012
> which is available on the WWW. The relevant part of the report are
> reproduced as under:

10\. Google explained in its responses that it minimised tax within the letter
of the law and that low tax areas or tax havens influenced where it located
its group companies. The vast majority of Google's non-USA sales are billed in
Ireland. Goodie makes money from business to business advertising, adverts
which can be targeted to the UK website and to UK Google users. In the UK,
Google Ltd recorded revenues of £396 million in 2011, from Google Ireland, but
paid corporation tax of only £6 million. Google Ireland paid for the services
provided by the 1,300 staff in the UK. Google had approximately 700 staff who
undertake marketing work in the UK as part of their activities, but only 200
of Google's Irish staff of 3,000 were involved in marketing Google in the UK.

11\. Google accepted that profits should be taxed in the jurisdictions where
the economic activity generating those profits occurred but it asserted that
its underlying economic activity arose from the innovative software technology
underlying its Google search engine generated by the US company. Goodie also
confirmed that it had an entity based in Bermuda to protect its intellectual
property. We consider that the company undermined its own argument since it
remits its non-USA profits (including from the UK) not to the USA but to
Bermuda and therefore may be depriving the USA of legitimate tax revenue as
well as the UK. Subsequently, Google told us that there were no outstanding
issues with HMRC about Google UK's accounts. HMRC is IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 188 of 331 currently carrying out a review of
the tax returns filed by Google. UK for 2005-11 inclusive and Google told us
this is standard practice and that it is co-operating fully with that review.

Q472 Chair: You very helpfully told us that about 700 people sell into the UK
--marketing people-- compared with 200 in Ireland. What I do not understand is
that the Irish guys pay a fee to Google Netherlands Holdings BV. Is that to
save withholding tax?

Matt Brittin: There was an arrangement in place to do that, but I understand
that it is no longer necessary.

Q473 Chair: But was it put in place to save withholding tax?

Matt Brittin: That is my understanding.

Q474 Chair: It was. Thank you. That is a very direct answer, and the first we
have had today. But it is no longer necessary. Does it therefore go to Google
Ireland Holdings?

Matt Brittin: That is correct.

Q475 Chair: Which is registered in Ireland but administered from Bermuda. Matt
Brittin: That is correct.

Q476 Chair: So if that happens, your profits go to Bermuda. How much is
sitting in Bermuda?

Matt Brittin: I do not know the number, but it is true that Bermuda is part of
our operations, and the reason is that when an international company sets up
operations outside your domestic market, which in our case is the US, you look
for where to locate your operations. Within the European Union, we chose to
locate in Ireland, for the reasons I have explained, but you also need to
protect your intellectual property, and to set up operations in countries
around the world to do that. We have an entity in Bermuda to do that.
..........................

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 189 of 331 Q545 Austin Mitchell:
What cannot be fiddled through is paid at 12.5%, but the 12.5% is not paid on
most of it. It then goes on to the Netherlands, and then it goes to Bermuda.
Now, the interesting question is what that does for the shareholders. As Fiona
said, it does not benefit them--they cannot get their hands on it because 30%
tax would have to be paid for it to be repatriated to America, to the
shareholders. It sits there in a cash mountain. It makes no contribution to
all the research and development--the new technologies that you have been
telling us about--that is carried on in California; it just sits there. It is
probably lovely to visit it, walk round it, look at it, and think, "Ha ha ha,"
but what contribution does it actually make? Matt Brittin: It is a matter for
the board of Google, but I imagine that, if the resources are needed to be
used, they can be used.

..........................

1\. Could you provide information about how your shareholders benefit from the
Bermuda holdings? (Q527, Fiona McTaggart) During the hearing, several Members
suggested that shareholders only benefit if Google pays dividends back to
shareholders. This is not the case. Google Inc has not paid dividends to
shareholders at any point in the past and we have no current intention to do
so. The funds held can be used to expand Google Inc's business operations
outside of the U.S, which should in turn benefit Google's shareholders.

6.1 The subsequent deposition of Mr. Matt Brittin forms part of the report of
the House of Commons, Committee of Public Accounts, tiled "Tax Avoidance -
Google, Nineteenth Report of Session 2013-14", dated 10th June 2013 which is
available on the WWW. The relevant parts of the report are reproduced as
under:

> ...............

> Q143 Stephen Barclay: On that point, where is the intellectual property
> owned on the work those engineers are doing?

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 190 of 331 Matt Brittin: I
> think it depends on the specific projects that they are working on. The
> intellectual property for Google is licensed, as you know and referred to
> earlier, to Google Ireland, in order that Google Ireland can sell that
> aspect of the product that is saleable--the advertising platform.

> Q144 Stephen Barclay: So some of the intellectual property is owned in
> Ireland on that work?

Matt Brittin: Ireland have the right to sell those products. Q145 Stephen
Barclay: Is some of it also owned in Bermuda?

Matt Brittin: Yes.

.......................

Q150 Stephen Barclay: Right. What tax rate do you pay on transfers from
Ireland to Bermuda?

Matt Brittin: I don't think we pay a tax rate on Ireland to Bermuda. We talked
about Bermuda in the last hearing, and I confirmed that we do use Bermuda.
Obviously, Bermuda is a low-tax environment.

Q151 Stephen Barclay: Sure. So, what, you just transfer from Ireland to
Bermuda without any tax implications?

Matt Brittin: I would need to check, but I think that is my understanding.
.........................

Q150, 151. What tax rate do you pay on transfers from Ireland to Bermuda/Do
you just transfer from Ireland to Bermuda without any tax implications?

We do not make direct transfers of royalty payments or other payments subject
to withholding tax from Ireland (ie, Google Ireland Ltd. or "GIL") to Bermuda
(ie, Google Ireland Holdings or "GIH"). Rather, we make transfers from GIL to
Google Netherlands Holdings BV ("GNBV"), and from GNBV to GIH. No withholding
taxes are payable on these transfers.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 191 of 331 Our use of GNBV as
part of our corporate structure is a legacy from when we set up our
international business over a decade ago. We structured it that way because of
concerns about potential Irish withholding taxes. As mentioned in our previous
testimony we do not believe that our use of GNBV has a material effect on
royalty payments or other payments subject to withholding tax from GIL,
primarily because of changes made in 2010 to Irish tax laws and regulations.

.....................

Q154 Stephen Barclay: The crux of my point is that you are depriving the US
taxpayer of significant funds, because this is economic activity in the US,
and technology developed in the US, which I presume was then sold to an
operation in Bermuda, probably in 2001 or 2002. The tax you save on that
deprives the US taxpayer of significant sums. The significance to us in the UK
is that the tax you save on those non-US profits is then used for a
competitive distortion to allow you, in essence, to compete against UK
companies, because you have a huge amount of profit on which you are not
paying tax. Matt Brittin: No, I don't think that is right. The money that goes
to Bermuda can be used for funding our growth outside the US, so that money
can be used for R and D expenses, acquisitions and investment in data centres
or buildings. In fact, since we met last time, we have committed £1 billion to
investment in King's Cross to increase our presence in the UK, and we could
fund that from Bermuda. Thousands of companies, including many British
companies, use arrangements such as ours in Bermuda, which allow us to invest
in the growth of our business outside the US. Large sums are spent on R and D,
acquisitions, investments in buildings and, as I have mentioned, we have just
committed to King's Cross.

6.2 It is evident from the Report of the Public Accounts Committee of the
House of Commons that the profits derived by GIL are transferred to the entity
GIH which IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 192 of 331
is controlled and managed in Bermuda, a tax haven. Even in the case of India
the revenue earned by GIPL on sale of advertising space are routed through the
same structure and the profits finally end up with GIH which is controlled and
managed in Bermuda. The structure has been used by Google in order to avoid
tax. 6.3 The fact that the profits from advertising services end in the tax
haven Bermuda also appears in the discussion between the one of the Directors
of OECD and the Irish Legislators in the WVVW in the link http:/
oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/DebatesWebPack.nsf/comm
itteetakes/FI52013072300005?opendocument. This link is regarding Global
Taxation Architecture: Discussion with Director of the OECD Centre for Tax
Policy and Administration Mr. Pascal Saint-Amans and the Irish legislators. At
page 9 in the link, the Irish Legislator Deputy Richard Boyd Barett describes
the term "Double Irish" sandwich in relation to Google which is reproduced
below for reference:

> Deputy Richard Boyd Barrett: Yes; it is double Dutch. The only explanation
> Mr. Saint-Amans seems to be giving is that our low corporate tax rate seems
> to attract companies involved in this aggressive tax avoidance, For the
> benefit of peopletrying to understand this situation, is the following
> briefdescription, given to me by former Google workers, an accurate
> description of how Ireland functions as a facilitator of tax avoidance?
> Google's advertising is a digital product. They sell that product to
> customers in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa from their Dublin HQ - and
> as such don't have to pay taxes on that anywhere except Ireland because the
> sale of that good is deemedunderinternationallawtohavetakenplaceinIreland.
> The profit they make from all those advertising sales is eaten up by a
> charge levied by Google Ireland Limited's holding company - which
> (conveniently) tends to be almost the exact amount of profit they make. The
> little bit that is left is charged at the standard 12.5%.

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 193 of 331 The holding
> company's profits aren't taxed because of Irish law waiving corporation tax
> on certain profits made from intellectual property royalties and/or because
> the company isn't managed or controlled in Ireland. That money then tends to
> be routed through further subsidiaries in Holland before moving to the
> Caribbean.

6.4 Relevant part of the article Ireland's For Sale Sign: The 12.5%
Corporation Tax Rate by Donald Brennan appearing in the Irish Left Review
Journal, January 2013 wherein the Double Irish structure used by Google is
explained, is reproduced below forreference:

> In effect it requires the creation of two Irish holding companies. A US
> corporation has the ability to own 'non-US' intellectual property, in an
> Irish company which is not an Irish tax resident. As the company is
> incorporated in Ireland, it's seen as Irish from a US point view, but from
> Irish Revenue's perspective it is a foreign company and therefore not
> subject to withholding tax. This conveniently ignores the fact that the non-
> resident Irish company is in a tax haven like the Cayman Islands or Bermuda.
> It then enters into a licensing agreement with an Irish incorporated and
> Irish tax-resident company (the second holding company), which from Irish
> revenue's point of view is subject to corporation tax. This second holding
> company acts as the EMEA hub where, nominally,pass through. However, for the
> money to flow to the Cayman Islands or Bermuda it requires the use of the
> Netherlands. In the Netherland's another company is created called
> Netherlands Holdings B.V, for example.

The case of Google is perhaps the best known, although the structure exists
for many, if not potentially all companies. We know, for example, that the two
'Irish' holding companies are Google Ireland Holdings and Google Ireland
Limited. So, when a French, Egyptian or Indian customer buys services from
Google (such as Adwords or Adsense) their credit card is debited to a bank
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 194 of 331 account located in
Dublin and appears as a sale in Google Ireland Limited. While Google Ireland
Limited takes the sale, it has to 'buy' the rights for the Google algorithm or
Google trademark from Google Ireland Holdings, which is nominally in Bermuda.
However, rather than the money moving directly to Bermuda it goes to a holding
company in the Netherlands, Google Netherlands Holdings B.V, from which it is
passed hack to Google Ireland Holdings. The Netherland's entity, according to
Bloomberg, "pays out about 99.8 percent of what it collects to the Bermuda
entity, company filings show."

This odd structure and the way it is treated by Irish revenue is put in place
because of the perspective of US tax law. As Prof Edward Kleinbard put it in a
2071 academic paper published in the Florida Tax Review:

> "...from a US tax point of view, neither Ireland Limited nor Google BV
> exists at all. The United States sees only an Irish (not Bermuda) company
> (Irish Holdings) with a Bermuda branch, where most of its net income comes
> to rest."

It's important to remember that while we are mentioning geographical places no
physical movement actually occurs. As the Bloomberg report showed the
Amsterdam-based subsidiary lists no employees. Similarly, Goggle Ireland
Holdings has no employees.. It's a registered company in Bermuda: number
4531144 and is owned by Google Bermuda Unlimited. According to the French
investigative magazine OWNI, "Google Bermuda only consists of a mailbox held
by Conyers Dill & Pearman, a company which specializes in offshore
arrangements. The firm is composed of several local business lawyers, working
on behalf of multinational companies interested in this tax haven's benefits"
45. Its unlimited status is important, as in Irish law this means that it
doesn't have to publish its accounts. Google Bermuda Unlimited owns Google
Ireland Holdings also an unlimited company, which owns IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 195 of 331 Google Ireland Limited and Google
Europe. However, the 'Bermuda' company Google Ireland Holdings and Irish
company Google Ireland Limited are both registered at the office of a certain
Dublin solicitor. Google Ireland Holdings has to be registered in Ireland for
it to be considered under US tax law as an 'Irish company'.

6.5 Reference is drawn to the Article by Jesse Drucker dated Oct 21, 2010
appearing in the website Bloomberg Technology, the extracts of which are
reproduced below: Google Inc. cut its taxes by $3.1 billion (in the last three
years using a technique that moves most of its foreign profits through Ireland
and the Netherlands to Bermuda.

Google's income shifting -- involving strategies known to lawyers as the
"Double Irish" and the "Dutch Sandwich" -- helped reduce its overseas tax rate
to 2.4 percent, the lowest of the top five U.S. technology companies by market
capitalization, according to regulatory filings in six countries. "It's
remarkable that Google's effective rate is that low," said Martin A. Sullivan,
a tax economist who formerly worked for the U.S. Treasury Department. "We know
this company operates throughout the world mostly in high-tax countries where
the average corporate rate is well over 20 percent."

..................

The earnings wind up in island havens that levy no corporate income taxes at
all. Companies that use the Double Irish arrangement avoid taxes at home and
abroad as the U.S. government struggles to close a projected $1.4 trillion
budget gap and European Union countries face a collective projected deficit of
868 billion euros. Countless Companies .................

Transfer Pricing IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 196 of 331
The tactics of Google and Facebook depend on "transfer pricing," paper
transactions among corporate subsidiaries that allow for allocating income to
tax havens while attributing expenses to higher-tax countries ...........
..............

The Double Irish As a strategy for limiting taxes, the Double Irish method is
"very common at the moment, particularly with companies with intellectual
property," said Richard Murphy, director of U.K.- based Tax Research LLP.
Murphy, who has worked on similar transactions, estimates that hundreds of
multinationals use some version of the method.

....................

Boosting Earnings ..................

Taxpayer Funding ...................

Arm's Length Income shifting commonly begins when companies like Google sell
or license the foreign rights to intellectual property developed in the U.S.
to a subsidiary in a low- tax country. That means foreign profits based on the
technology get attributed to the offshore unit, not the parent. Under U.S. tax
rules, subsidiaries must pay "arm's length" prices for the rights -- or the
amount an unrelated company would. Because the payments contribute to taxable
income, the parent company has an incentive to set them as low as possible.
Cutting the foreign subsidiary's expenses effectively shifts profits overseas.

After three years of negotiations, Google received approval from the IRS in
2006 for its transfer pricing arrangement, according to filings with the
Securities and Exchange Commission.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 197 of 331 The IRS gave its
consent in a secret pact known as an advanced pricing agreement. Google
wouldn't discuss the price set under the arrangement, which licensed the
rights to its search and advertising technology and other intangible property
for Europe, the Middle East and Africa to a unit called Google Ireland
Holdings, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Dublin Office That licensee in turn owns Google Ireland Limited, which employs
almost 2,000 people in silvery glass office building in central Dublin, a
block from the city's Grand Canal. The Dublin subsidiary sells advertising
globally and was credited by Google with 88 percent o, its $12.5 billion in
non-U.S. sales in 2009. Allocating the revenue to Ireland helps Google avoid
income taxes in the U.S., where most of its technology was developed. The
arrangement also reduces the company's liabilities in relatively high-tax
European countries where many of its customers are located.

The profits don't stay with the Dublin subsidiary, which reported pretax
income of less than 1 percent of sales in 2008, according to Irish records.
That's largely because it paid $5.4 billion in royalties to Google Ireland
Holdings, which has its "effective centre of management" in Bermuda, according
to company filings. Law Firm Directors 7 This Bermuda-managed entity is owned
by a pair of Google subsidiaries that list as their directors two attorneys
and a manager at Conyers Dill & Pearman, a Hamilton, Bermuda law firm.

Tax planners call such an arrangement a Double Irish because it relies on two
Irish companies. One pays royalties to use intellectual property, generating
expenses that reduce Irish taxable income. The second collects the royalties
in a tax haven like Bermuda, avoiding Irish taxes.

To steer clear of an Irish withholding tax, payments from Google's Dublin unit
don't go directly to Bermuda. A brief detour to the Netherlands avoids that
liability, IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 198 of 331
because Irish tax law exempts certain royalties to companies in other EU-
member nations. The fees first go to a Dutch unit, Google Netherlands Holdings
B. V., which pays out about 99.8 percent of what it collects to the Bermuda
entity, company filings show. The Amsterdam-based subsidiary lists no
employees. The Dutch Sandwich Inserting the Netherlands stopover between two
other units gives rise to the "Dutch Sandwich" nickname.

"The sandwich leaves no tax behind to taste," said Murphy of Tax Research LLP.
......................

Getting Profits Out "You accumulate profits within Ireland, but then you get
them out of the country relatively easily," Stewart said. "And you do it by
using Bermuda." ...........................

Once Google's non-U.S. profits hit Bermuda, they become difficult to track.
The subsidiary managed there changed its legal form of organization in 2006 to
became a so-called unlimited liability company. Under Irish rules, that means
it's not required to disclose such financial information as income statements
or balance sheets.

"Sticking an unlimited company in the group structure has become more common
in Ireland, largely to prevent disclosure," Stewart said. Deferred
Indefinitely ................

Administration Concerned ...................

To contact the reporter on this story: Jesse Drucker in New York at
jdrucker4@bloomberg.net.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 199 of 331 6.6 the above Article
describes that Google uses the "Double Irish sandwich" in order to transfer
the profits earned from advertising services to Bermuda which is a tax haven.
Google Ireland Holdings ("GIH") which though registered in Ireland is
controlled and managed from Bermuda and therefore the profits from sale of
advertising space through the Google Adwords Program lands up in Bermuda. 6.7
It is apparent that Double Irish structure is used by Google to transfer the
profits from its advertising services arising in the different parts of the
world, including India, to the tax-haven Bermuda. GIPL has not been able to
substantiate that GIL is the beneficial owner of the amounts payable even
after numerous opportunities were given. GIPL was given an opportunity to
defend its claim by giving it an opportunity to furnish all relevant documents
and agreements. These agreements would have helped in understanding whether
GIL is the beneficial owner. However GIPL declined to furnish the same.
Accordingly GIL cannot avail the India-Ireland Treaty benefits and the Treaty
rate of 10% cannot be applied in the instant case.

6.8 The Judiciary in India has addressed the issue of beneficial ownership by
focusing on the issue of substance of the transaction and the entities
involved. In a landmark judgment in Aditya Birla Nuvo Ltd. V, Dy. DIT
(International Taxation) [2012] 342 ITR 308, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court
held that a Mauritius entity holding shares in the Indian company is not the
"beneficial owner" but it was only the US parent which is the "beneficial
owner" of such shares. Accordingly benefits under Indo-Mauritus tax treaty
were denied on the basis of applying look through approach. The Court observed
that the voting rights, rights of management and rights of sale or alienation
of shares were vested with the US entity and hence the same is the "beneficial
owner"

6.9 The Hon`ble AAR dealt with the issue of beneficial ownership in the case
of Nat West Securities B.V. v. Dy. CIT [2005] 1 SOT 503 (Mum.), X Ltd., In re
[1996] 220 ITR 377/86 Taxman 252 (AAR-New Delhi). A British bank incorporated
its IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 200 of 331
subsidiaries in Mauritius and routed investments into India through those
subsidiaries and claimed benefits of Indo Mauritius tax treaty against
dividend income etc. AAR observed that Mauritius subsidiaries are not
beneficial owners of the shares, AAR rejected application on the ground that
transaction was designed to avoid taxes. The facts placed before the AAR led
to the inference that the purpose of investment through subsidiaries was only
for avoidance of taxes and availing lower tax rates through Indo-Mauritus tax
treaty. As the substance of Mauritus entities could not be established, the
same were not treated as beneficial owners of the investments.

6.10 Therefore the Indian Judiciary has adopted the substance over form
approach in relation to beneficial ownership. Based on this approach and
relying on the transfer pricing documentation for AY 2009-10, the statement
made under Oath before the Public Accounts Committee, House of Commons,
British Parliament by Mr. Matt Brittin of Google UK Ltd and the various
articles appearing in WWW it is seen that GIL is not the beneficial owner of
the amounts paid/payable by GIPL. The amounts paid/payable by GIPL to GIL end
up in Gill which is controlled and managed in the tax haven Bermuda. Thus GIH
is the beneficial owner of the amounts paid/payable by GIPL.

7 India does not have a Tax Treaty with Bermuda. Hence the rates under the Act
will apply. Section 206AA of the Act requires the deductee to furnish the
Permanent Account Number ("PAN") to the deductor failing which the deductor
shall deduct tax at source at higher of the following rates:

    
    
    (i)     the rate prescribed in the Act;
    (ii)    at the rate in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
    (iii)   at the rate of 20 per cent.
    7.1     In the notice dated 21st Dec 2013 the assessee company GIPL was given an
    

opportunity to submit the Permanent Account Number ("PAN") of GIH. In the
submission dated 26th Dec 2013 it was stated by GIPL, that Section 206AA makes
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 201 of 331 it mandatory for the
person who is entitled to receive the amount and not the beneficial owner of
the amount to furnish PAN to the deductor. It was further stated that GIL is
the person that is entitled to receive the amount as per the Distribution
Agreement and since GIL has already obtained a PAN the provisions of Section
206AA are not applicable.

7.2 According to GIPL the person referred in Section 206AA(1) "any person
entitled to receive any sum or amount on which tax is deductible ........"
cannot be equated with person who is the beneficial owner of the sum or
amounts. However such understanding is based on the incorrect interpretation
of the person referred in Section 206AA(1).

7.3 In the instant case GIPL has not established that GIL is the person
entitled to receive any sum or amount since as explained in the preceding
paragraphs the sums received by GIL are transferred to the group entity GUI
which is controlled and managed in Bermuda.

7.4 GIPL did not avail the opportunities given to furnish the agreement
between GIL and GNHBV, agreement between GNHBV and GIH in order to
substantiate its claims that GIL has all the attributes of ownership over the
sums paid/payable by GIPL. The Assessee company, GIPL has merely furnished the
Financial statements of GIL to claim that GIL is the actual beneficiary of the
sums paid/payable to it but the agreements between GIL and GNHBV and GNHBV and
GIH have not been furnished. These agreements contain the terms and conditions
under which GIL has been given the licensing rights over the Adwords program.
These agreements also contain the stipulations that decide the royalty
payments that have to be made by GIL on the sale of Adwords programs. GIL
under the agreement may be required to transfer all the revenues from sale of
Adwords programs to GNHBV after keeping a small sum to meet the administrative
expenses. Therefore the submissions of the financial statements of GIL the
year ending December 2012 only shows that GIL is an operational company but it
does not say anything with respect to the ownership IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 202 of 331 and control over the sums
paid/payable by GIPL. Hence the claim of GIPL that GIL is the beneficial owner
of the sums paid/payable, is not acceptable and it is GIH which is entitled to
receive the sums from GIPL."

156\. The AO has also examined the information available in public domain in
this regard and finally concluded that GIL is not the beneficial owner of the
royalty received from GIPL and accordingly taxed the royalty at 10.556%.

157\. Aggrieved, the assessee preferred an appeal before the CIT(Appeals) and
the CIT(A) being convinced with the contentions of the assessee, accepted the
claim of assessee and held that GIL is the beneficial owner of the royalty
received.

158\. Now the revenue is before us and during the course of hearing, the ld.
Standing Counsel has invited our attention to the Report of House of Commons,
Committee of Public Accounts, who have recorded the statement of Mr. Mett
Brittin, VP of Google Sales & Operations, Northern & Central Europe. The ld.
Standing Counsel has also contended that assessee was asked to furnish the
agreements executed between GNHBV & GIL, GIH & GNHBV and Google Inc. and GIH,
in order to understand that how much right was conferred upon the other
companies through license agreement. Undisputedly, Google Adwords program is
owned by Google Inc. USA. It was licensed by Google IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 203 of 331 Inc. to Google Ireland Holdings
(GIH) which in turn was further licensed to Google Netherlands Holding BV
(GNHBV) and in turn GNHBV licensed it to Google Ireland Ltd. (GIL). Since
there are four layers of holdings of this Adwords program, it is not clear how
much right in license were conferred to different holdings and how the revenue
collected on Adwords program is to be distributed amongst the above holdings.
The assessee has claimed that GIL is the beneficial owner of the payment of
royalty, therefore onus is upon it to place evidence on record that out of the
total revenue collected on account of Adwords program, major share goes to
GIL. But the assessee did not discharge its obligation and raised a vague
argument.

159\. The ld. Standing Counsel further placed reliance upon the Hon'ble
Finance Minister's clarification on Tax Residency Certificate (TRC) dated
01.03.2013 on which the assessee has placed heavy reliance with the submission
that through this clarification it has been made clear that TRC produced by a
resident of contracting state will be accepted as evidence that he is a
resident of that contracting state and income-tax authorities in India will
not go behind the TRC and question the resident status. He also invited our
attention to the clarification regarding the taxation of income from dividends
and capital gain under Indo-Mauritius Double Tax Avoidance Convention (DTAC)
with the submission that the clarification was issued with regard to taxation
from dividends IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 204 of 331
and capital gains under Indo-Mauritius DTAC. Though it has been clarified that
wherever certificate of residence is issued by Mauritius authorities, such
certificate will constitute sufficient evidence for accepting the status of
residence as well as beneficial ownership for applying the DTAC accordingly.
Therefore the clarification issued would not apply to the income received in
the form of royalty. Moreover, the AO has made out a case that different
layers of holdings were involved in the Adwords program and the revenue has to
be shared amongst them, therefore it cannot be presumed only on the basis of
TRC that GIL is the beneficial owner. Therefore, the CIT(Appeals) has wrongly
concluded that GIL is the beneficial owner under the facts and circumstances.
In succeeding year, the CIT(A) has concurred with the view of the AO. The ld.
Standing Counsel further placed a reliance upon the judgment of High Court of
Australia in the case of Google Inc. v. Australian Competition and Consumers
Commission[2013] HCA 1 249 CLR 435 in which it was held that Google is the
owner of the search engine and the Adwords programs which were later on given
to license to other holdings.

160\. The ld. Counsel for the assessee, Mr. Percy Pardiwalla, Sr. Advocate,
has placed heavy reliance upon the clarifications given with regard to Indo-
Mauritius DTAC with the submission that the Circular No.789 dated 13.04.2000
in this regard continued to be in force at the time when the press release was
issued on 01.03.2013 by Finance Ministry IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 205 of 331 with regard to clarification on tax
residency certificates. Therefore, in the light of this clarification, the TRC
in respect of GIL submitted by the assessee is sufficient to hold that GIL is
the beneficial owner of the royalty received. Therefore, it should be charged
to tax only @ 10%.

161\. The learned Counsel for the assessee further contended that the GIL was
controlling the AdWord Program and has given a distributor right to the
Appellant under the Google AdWord Program. Whatever revenue is generated under
this Google AdWord Program it was remitted to GIL by the Appellant after
deducting its share as per the Distribution Agreement. It was further
contended that it has been repeatedly held that the residency certificate is a
beneficial ownership certificate and on its filing the Revenue will not make
any further enquiry with regard to the residential status of the non-resident.
In support of his contention, he has placed reliance upon the following
judgments:

 ADIT Vs. Universal International Music BV reported at (2011) 45 SOT 219
(Mum.)  Authority of Advanced Ruling, New Delhi P.No.13 of 1995 (1997) 94
Taxman 171 (AAR-New Delhi) IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 206 of 331  Alibaba.com ecommerce Pvt. Ltd., Vs. ADIT ITA No.3332 to
3334/Mum/2015 dated 30.11.2016  Authority of Advanced Ruling, New Delhi
Ex.Ltd., in re. (1996) 86 Taxman 292 (AAR-New Delhi)  Velcro Canada Inc., Vs.
R reported at 2012 TCC 57 Tax court of Canada  Vodafone International Holding
BV Vs. UOI 341 ITR 1 (SC)  Director of Income Tax Vs. Universal International
Music BV (2013) 31 taxmann.com 223 (Bombay)

162\. With regard to the report of House of Commons, Committee of Public
Accounts, the ld. Counsel for the assessee has contended that report was
prepared in different context, therefore it cannot be relied on while
examining the beneficial ownership character of GIL. He however placed
reliance upon the order of the CIT(Appeals) for the AY 2013-14.

163\. Having carefully examined the orders of lower authorities in the light
of rival submissions, we find that in AY 2013-14, the CIT(Appeals) has
accepted the contention of the assessee that GIL is the beneficial owner of
the royalty received, whereas in the succeeding years, the CIT(Appeals) has
concurred with the view of the AO that GIL is not the beneficial owner. Now
the assessee and revenue are before us on this issue.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 207 of 331

164\. During the course of hearing, we have directed the assessee to produce
the agreements executed between Google Inc. USA and GIH, GIH & GNHBV and GNHBV
& GIL. In response thereto, the ld. Counsel for the assessee has stated that
they have no access to these agreements. He however filed the license
agreement executed between GIL and GNHBV. It is also noticed from the record
that GIPL is a 100% subsidiary of Google International LLC and GIL is the
subsidiary of GNHBV. GNHBV is a subsidiary of Google Ireland Holdings and
Google Ireland Holdings is a subsidiary of Google Inc. USA. Therefore, all
these companies are interconnected and inter-related, therefore contention of
assessee cannot be accepted that it has no access to license agreements
executed between different holdings with regard to Adwords program.

From a careful reading of operating license agreement executed between GNHBV
and GIL, we find that GIL has acquired certain right to use certain
proprietary technology as well as certain trademark and intangible including
those described in Exhibit-A and Exhibit-B. Through this license agreement,
the license to use, license trademarks, license technology, license
improvements was given by GNHBV to Google Ireland Ltd.

It is also clear from a reading of various clauses that the licensee i.e., GIL
is not the legal owner of the license trade marks and the license technology,
meaning thereby that GIL is not the owner of license technology and license
trademark which include Adwords program and GIL has only acquired certain
rights in intangibles from GNHBV. Though IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 208 of 331 there is a clause for license fee statement,
it is not clear as to how much license fees is to be paid by GIL to GNHBV on
account of sub-license of Adword program. If we compare this agreement with
the distributor agreement executed between GIPL and GIL, we would find that in
both the agreements, the licensee have admitted that IPRs and the intangibles
are owned by licensor. For the sake of reference, we extract the relevant
clauses of the aforesaid agreement as under:-

> "OPERATING LICENSE AGREEMENT THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT (this "Agreement-) is
> effective as of January 1, 2004, by and between Google Netherlands Holdings
> B.V., a company organized under the law, of the Netherlands (the
> "Licensor"), and Google Ireland Limited, a company organized under the laws
> of Ireland (the "Licensee").

> RECITALS A. Licensor has the right to use and commercialize certain
> proprietary technology, as well as certain tradenames, trademarks and other
> intangible property including as more fully described below and on Exhibits
> A and B hereto. B. Licensor wishes to provide Licensee with all rights
> necessary to use the proprietary technology and intangible property in its
> business within the Territory and to license those rights to Licensee for
> the Territory, and Licensee wishes to license those rights as provide
> herein.

> ........................

> 1\. Definitions.For purposes of this Agreement, the following terms shall
> have the meanings set forth below:

> ........................

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 209 of 331 "LICENSED MARKS"
means those trademarks, service marks and trade names owned or used by
Licensor as of the Effective Date of this Agreement, including those
specifically listed on EXHIBIT B.

"LICENSED TECHNOLOGY" means any and all technologies, procedures, processes,
designs and design rights, inventions, discoveries, know-how, patents
(including utility models and the like, and patent applications pending before
any relevant authority worldwide, with any additions, continuations,
continuations-in- part, divisions, reissues or extensions based thereon),
copyrights (and other rights of authorship), mask work rights, trade secrets,
computer programs (in source code and object code form), flow charts,
formulae, enhancements„ updates, translations, adaptations, information,
specifications, designs, process technology, manufacturing requirements,
quality control standards and any other intangible property owned or licensed
in, in whole or in part, by Licensor and in existence as of the Effective Date
of this Agreement, including but not limited to those items listed in EXHIBIT
A.

.....................

2\. Grant of License.

a. General Terms of Grant. Upon the terms and subject to the conditions of
this Agreement:

(i) Licensor hereby grants to Licensee, and Licensee hereby accepts, a limited
non-exclusive, non-transferable (except as provided herein) license to utilize
the Licensed Technology to conduct research and development activity and
process development activity and to utilize the Licensed Technology within its
Territory (1) to manufacture, market, distribute, sell, license or exploit
Products, (ii) to use the Licensed Technology to provide advertising,
technical support, training, consulting or other services and (iii) to
sublicense the Licensed Technology to third parties for any of the foregoing
purposes; provided, however, that any such activities taken by
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 210 of 331 Licensee shall be in
a manner reasonably consistent with that of Licensor in Licensor's territory;
and

(ii) Licensor also hereby grants to Licensee, and Licensee hereby accepts, a
limited non-exclusive, non-transferable (except as provided herein) license to
utilize the Licensed Marks solely in conjunction with Licensee's
manufacturing, marketing, distribution, sale, lease, licensing, use and
exploitation of the Products, and such other products as may be authorized in
writing by Licensor from time to time during the continuance of this
Agreement, within the Territory, solely in accordance with the terms and
conditions herein. Licensee hereby acknowledges and agrees that, except as
specifically provided in this Section 2, Licensee shall acquire no rights
whatsoever with respect to any of the Marks, Licensee shall not utilize any of
the Marks (i) outside of the Territory, or (ii) in connection with any
products other than the Products.

.......................

c. Sublicenses. Subject to the terms and conditions herein, Licensee shallhave
the right to sublicense the licenses granted to it by Licensor. Any
sublicenses granted by Licensee under this Agreement shall provide for
termination or assignment to Licensor, at the option of Licensor, of
Licensee's interest therein upon termination of this Agreement and contain
provisions which obligate the sublicensee to Licensee to at least the same
extent that Licensee is obligated to Licensor under this Agreement.

.........................

    
    
           f.     Ownership of Licensor Intangibles
           (i)    Licensor Ownership of the Licensed Technology. Licensee
    

acknowledges that it is not the legal owner of the Licensed Technology and
that the Licensed Technology is not proprietary to, or does not constitute a
trade secret or IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 211 of 331
confidential information of, Licensee. Licensee agrees not to contest
Licensor's ownership of its interests in the Licensed Technology or Licensor's
right to license the use of the Licensed Technology on the terms and
conditions of this Agreement. ......................

3.2 Licensor Ownership of Licensed Marks Acknowledged. Licensee acknowledges
that it is not the legal owner of the Licensed Marks and that its only rights
in the Licensed Marks are those granted under this Agreement. Licensee agrees
not to contest Licensor's ownership of its interests in the Licensed Marks or
Licensor's right to license the use of the Licensed Marks on the terms and
conditions of this Agreement.

.............................

f. License Fee Statement. On the date that each payment is due under the terms
of this Agreement, Licensee shall concurrently deliver to Licensor a written
statement setting forth the computations made in calculation of the License
Fees due in such calendar quarter (including a computation of Licensee's gross
revenue attributable to the Products for the applicable three month period),
whether or not License Fees were actually earned by Licensor for the
applicable three month period, along with any other related information
necessary to compute the amount of License Fees, if any, that is due.

g. Currency and Transfer of Funds. All payments due under the terms of this
Agreement shall be payable in U.S. Dollars or Euros or such other currency
determined by the mutual agreement of the Parties, and may be transferred in
such manner as the Parties may mutually agree. In addition, Licensor agrees
that it will pay, on an annual basis, based on financial statements prepared
in accordance with U.S. GAAP (as implemented by Licensor), an amount, to be
treated as an adjustment to the license payment, equal to any net foreign
exchange loss incurred by Licensee. Conversely Licensee agrees to pay to
Licensor any net foreign exchange gain computed on the same basis and on the
same terms.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 212 of 331
....................................

6\. Additional Covenants And Agreements Of The Parties.

a. Confidential Information. The term "Confidential Information," as used
herein, shall mean for each party all information that relates to any or all
of the Products, the Licensed Technology, Licensee Improvements and Licensed
Marks, or to the business, finances, technology, plans, affairs or activities
of the Party. Confidential Information may be disclosed or revealed orally,
visually or in writing or other tangible form. All information disclosed or
revealed under this Agreement shall be deemed to be Confidential Information
if (i) it is in written or other tangible form, and has been marked
"confidential", (ii) a Party has been placed on notice, orally or in writing
that such information is confidential, or (iii) in view of the nature or
character of the information, a reasonable person, under similar
circumstances, would treat it as confidential.

...........................

7\. Intellectual Property Management.

    
    
          a.     Patent Prosecution And Maintenance.
                 (i)    Licensor shall be solely responsible for the preparation, filing,
    

prosecution and maintenance of patents or patent applications included in the
Licensed Technology, including all payment obligations, provided that Licensor
shall not be required to prosecute or maintain any such patents."

165\. Other agreements executed between Google Inc and GIH and GIH & GNHBV
were not placed before us. Therefore, in the absence of these agreements, it
is very difficult for us to decide as to how much share GIL will get out of
the revenue collected in the form of royalty under the Adwords Distribution
agreement and services agreement IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 213 of 331 from the GIPL. Since the onus is upon the assessee to
establish that GIL is the beneficial owner, assessee could not place any
evidence except the oral submission.

166\. We have also examined the clarification issued by the Ministry of
Finance through Circular No.789 dated 13.04.2000 and the press release dated
01.03.2013. Through Circular No.789, it has been made clear that wherever
certification of registration is issued by Mauritius authorities, such
certificate will constitute sufficient evidence for accepting the status of
residence as well as beneficial ownership for applying the DTAC.

Through Press Release dated 01.03.2013, it has been clarified that the Tax
Residency Certificate (TRC) produced by a resident of a contracting state
shall be accepted as evidence that he is a resident of that contracting state
and income-tax authorities in India will not go behind the TRC and question
the resident status, meaning thereby, through this Press Release, it has been
made clear that Tax Residency Certificate (TRC) is the final word with regard
to resident status of the party and the Revenue cannot go beyond it unless and
until they have some other evidence.

167\. We have also examined the various judgments referred by the learned
Counsel for the assesse. In the case of ADIT Vs. Universal International Music
BV (supra), the Tribunal has held that once the resident certificate issued by
the Netherland Tax authority is not doubted by the AO, the assessee has to be
treated beneficial owner of royalty in IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 214 of 331 view of such certificate even if no agreement with repartiore
companies regarding acquisition of rights by assessee has been filed.

168\. The Authority of Advanced Ruling in P.13 of 1995 (supra) has observed
while dealing with the issue of beneficial ownership that "the agreements
require ABC to utilize all the expertise at its disposal - whether its own or
acquired from others - in the execution of the contract and for these services
it receives payments which are in the nature of royalties or fee for technical
services. The circumstances that, for discharging its functionsunder the
contracts, the ABC in turn may have to seek similar help from others and pay
for it cannot detract from the beneficial ownership of the ABC over the
royalties and technical fees it receives from XY. On the other hand, it is
because the ABC has such beneficial ownership that it is able to utilize the
payments received from XY for making payments to its suppliers if not already
made. In fact, ABC may or may not be passing on to its suppliers the same
amounts which it receives from XY. Nor may it be passing on the expertise
acquired by it from the various suppliers in the same form to XY as it has to
modify, synthesise and integrate them so as to suit the needs of the
manufacturing plant and industrial complex and supply the technologies to XY
as a single source. Hence, unless the processes and expertise referred to are
supplied directly to XY by the affiliates and third parties - which is not
envisaged under the agreements IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 215 of 331

\- royalties and technical fees paid by XY to the ABC will belong to the
latter and be in its beneficial ownership. Question Nos. 5 and 6 modified as
indicated above are answered accordingly."

169\. In the case of Alibaba.com E-Commerce Vs. ADIT (supra), the Tribunal has
observed that tax residency certificate is sufficient to determine the proof
of residency and the Income Tax Authorities cannot ignore the valid tax
residency certificate issued by the Government authority of the other
contacting state. The Tribunal has also taken a cognizance of the judgment of
the Apex Court in the case of Vodafone International Holding BV Vs. UOI
(supra) in which the court has held that the tax residency certificate (TRC)
does not prevent enquiry into a tax fraud, for example where an OCB is used by
Indian resident for wrong tripping or any other illegal activities and nothing
prevents the Revenue from looking into special agreements, contracts or
arrangements made or effected by Indian resident or the role of OCB in the
entire transaction and held that without any evidence the Revenue cannot treat
the assessee merely conduit of Alibaba.com, Hong Kong contrary to the material
on record.

170\. The Authority of Advanced Rules in X Ltd., (supra) did not answer the
questions posed before them and restored the matter with the direction that
more factual data should be obtained before the assessee companies are held
not to be beneficial owners IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 216 of 331 of shares held by them. In the case of Velcro Canada Inc., Vs.
R (supra), the tax court of Canada has held that Velcro Netherlands to be the
beneficial owners of the royalties because it had the possession, use, risk
and control of the funds. It was also contractually bound to pay an amount
equal to 90% of the royalties to Velcro Antilles but entitled to deal with the
actual payment received from Velcro Canada as its profit. They further held
that if Velcro Antilles choose to enforce the license agreement, the payment
was still made to Velcro Netherlands and Velcro Netherland had no power to
bind Velcro Antilles and was therefore not its agent.

171\. We have carefully examined the facts of the instant case in the light of
ratio laid down through various judgments by different judicial authorities
and the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the High Court and we find that in the
instant case the tax residency certificate was filed at page No.586 to 587 of
the compilation filed by the assessee in which it has been mentioned that the
Google Ireland files its corporation tax return in Ireland on the basis that
it is resident for tax purposes in Ireland. As such the company is liable to
Irish Corporation Tax on its world-wide income, profit and gains including any
income, profits and gains from its sales in India. In the certificate there is
no mention with regard to the beneficial ownership of the Google AdWord
Program of which distributorship was given to the Appellant.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 217 of 331

172\. In the instant case, the AO has made out a case that different layers of
holdings were involved in the receipts received by the GIL from GIPL, the
Appellant, under the Google AdWord Program. Undisputedly, the search engine
and Adwords program belong to GIL as is clear from the judgment of High Court
of Australia in which it has been held that Google Inc. operates the well
known internet search engine "Google". In that judgment, they have also
described how the Google engine functions and how the search results are
obtained. In that judgment, it was also held that Adwords Program is a program
which allows advertiser to create, change and monitor the performance of
sponsored links. Google provides advertisers with access to the Adwords
program through Adwords accounts. Worldwide, hundreds or thousands of
advertisers use the Adwords program. It was also observed that Google derives
most of its revenue from its online advertising business, which involves
publishing or displaying advertisements as sponsored links on its search
results pages. It was also made clear in that judgment that participation in
the Adwords program is subject to Google's Terms of Service, the Adwords
Program Terms and applicable Google policies, etc. From the reading of the
judgment, it is clear that Google Inc. is the ultimate body which controls the
Google Adwords program and they also share some part of revenue collected on
account of Adwords program. It is also undisputed fact that Google Inc. has
licensed the Adwords IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 218 of 331 program and other intangibles to Google Ireland Holdings
(GIH), who in turn licensed to Google Netherlands Holdings B.V. (GNHBV) and in
turn GNHBV further licensed the Adwords program and intangibles to Google
Ireland Ltd. (GIL), who finally has given the distributor rights of the
assessee for selling the Adwords space to advertisers, meaning thereby,
whatever revenue is generated on account of sale of Adwords space to different
advertisers, the revenue is to be distributed amongst all the holdings as they
have some beneficial interests therein. But before us, the assessee has not
filed license agreements executed between Google Inc. USA and Google Ireland
Holdings (GIH), GIH and GNHBV. Only one license agreement between GNHBV and
GIL was filed and from its careful perusal, we find that out of the rights
acquired in the Adwords program and intangibles, GNHBV has sub-licensed
certain rights to GIL for Adwords program. On the basis of that license, GIL
executed Adwords Distributor agreement with the appellant for selling the
Adwords space to advertisers. Since other parent holdings of GIL were involved
in the Adwords programs directly or indirectly, they have a right to share the
revenue generated under the Adwords Distributor Agreement.

Though the onus is cast upon the appellant to place the relevant evidence in
order to establish that GIL is the beneficial owner of the royalty received,
but it could not place any evidence on record in this regard, except the oral
submissions. Whereas, the AO has made out a case that so many holdings are
involved in this Adwords program, IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 219 of 331 therefore the revenue collected on account of royalty payment
is to be shared amongst the other holdings. The assessee rather could not
place the agreements executed between Google Inc. & GIH and GIH & GNHBV and
GNHBV and GIL before the AO despite his repeated requests. He has simply filed
the operating license agreement executed between GNHBV and GIL berore us and
for the remaining he has contended that he has no access to it. This
contention of the assessee cannot be accepted inasmuch as all Google companies
are inter-related and subsidiary of others. From a reading of this agreement,
it is not clear as to how much revenue is shared by different holdings. In the
absence of the relevant evidence either in the form of agreement executed
between the various holding companies or otherwise, it is not clear as to
whether the GIL has full control over the receipt received under Google AdWord
Program or the GIL was acting as a conduit of its parent holdings. We
therefore are of the view that this aspect requires a fresh look by the AO in
the light of all the relevant evidences. We accordingly restore the matter to
the AO after setting aside the order of the CIT(A) in this regard in all these
appeals to readjudicate the issue of beneficial ownership in the light of the
license agreements executed between the parent holdings of the GIL. We
accordingly direct the appellant to extend all sort of cooperation by
producing the agreement executed between the various parent holdings of the
GIL. Thus the matter is restored to the file of the AO to readjudicate the
issue of beneficial ownership in terms indicated above. Accordingly
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 220 of 331 appeal No.
1190/Bang/2014 is dismissed and appeal Nos. 949 & 950/Bang/2017 are partly
allowed for statistical purposes and appeal No. 1295/Bang/2014 is allowed for
statistical purposes.

173\. IT(TP)A Nos. 374 and 466/Bang/2013 These are cross appeals preferred by
the assessee as well as the Revenue against the order of the CIT(A) pertaining
to the assessment year 2008-09. Certain grounds are common in both these
appeals, therefore we adjudicate them together. However for the sake of
reference, we extract the grounds of appeal raised in both the appeals as
under:

Grounds of appeal in IT(TP)A No. 374/Bang/2013 "Based on the facts and
circumstances of the case, Google India Private Limited (hereinafter referred
to as the 'Appellant') respectfully submits that the order of the Commissioner
of Income-tax (Appeals)- I, Bangalore ('Ld CIT(A)'), is not correct as it is
based on incorrect interpretation of fact and law and therefore is bad in law
and hence, needs to be cancelled. The Appellant also submits that each of the
grounds hereinafter are independent and without prejudice to one another.

1\. The Ld CIT(A) erred in not deliberating upon the validity of the order
passed by the Learned Assessing Officer ('Ld AO') without appreciating the
fact that the Ld AO had passed a contingent order.

Rejection of Books of accounts:

2\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding that the accounts of the Appellant
were not consistent with the provisions of section 145 of the Act-and-That-
theLd.AO was justified in rejecting the same.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 221 of 331

3\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding that the Appellant was required to
credit Rs.167,32,01,616 to its Profit and Loss account.

4\. The Ld CIT(A) having held that 40% of the operations with respect to the
AdWords program were attributable to operations in India erred in holding that
the Appellant was required to credit the whole of Rs.167,32,01,616 to its
Profit and Loss account.

Disallowance of payments towards distribution rights invoking provisions of
section 40(a)(i) of the Act

5\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding that the amount Rs.119,82,61,994
remittable by the Appellant to Google Ireland under the

6\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding that the Appellant, in relation to
distribution of AdWords Program, was a Dependent Agent Permanent Establishment
of Google Ireland Ltd under Article 5 of the India-Ireland Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement.

7\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in holding that the Appellant was not remunerated
at arm's length.

8\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding that the Appellant was required to
deduct tax at source from Rs.119,82,61,994 remittable by the Appellant to
Google Ireland and in view of its failure to deduct tax, the amount of
Rs.119,82,61,994 was required to be disallowed u/s 40(a)(i) of the Act.

9\. The Ld CIT(A) having held that the Appellant was an agent of Google
Ireland Ltd. erred in holding that Appellant 'was a person responsible for
paying' any amount to Google Ireland Ltd. within the meaning of section 195 of
the Act.

Re-computation of profits from distribution of AdWords program in India

10\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding that the profits of Google Ireland
Ltd. from the AdWords program, to the extent they were attributable to
activities carried on in India, could be taxed in the hands of the Appellant.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 222 of 331

11\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in holding that 40% of re-computed profits on the
Rs.167,32,01,616, being the revenues collected in India under the AdWords
program, are attributable to activities carried on in India.

12\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in holding that the profit from revenues
collected in India under the AdWords program is 30.535%.

13\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in rejecting cost-plus method basis of
remuneration of the Appellant for the distribution of the AdWords program,
disregarding the fact that the same has been concluded by the transfer pricing
officer to be at arm's length under the Transactional Net Margin Method.

14\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in subjecting the Appellant to tax on 40% of the
re-computed profits from revenues collected in India under the AdWords
program.

Miscellaneous

15\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in surmising that Google Ireland Ltd. would,
insofar as the revenues collected in India under the AdWords program is
concerned, contend that "the amounts are liable for taxation in India only in
the hands of" the Appellant.

16\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in surmising that the Appellant and Google
Ireland would engage in self-serving pleas with the intent "to evade being
taxed in India".

17\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding the levy of interest u/s 234B of the
Act.

18\. The Ld CIT(A) has erred in upholding the validity of the initiation of
the penalty proceedings initiated u/s 271(1)(c) of the Act disregarding the
fact the Ld AO has passed a penalty order levying a penalty u/s 271(1)(c) of
the Act.

The Appellant craves, to consider each of the above grounds of appeal
independently without prejudice to one another and craves leave to add, alter,
delete or modify all or any of the above grounds of appeal."

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 223 of 331

174\. IT(TP)A No.466/Bang/2013

1\. The order of the Learned CIT (Appeals), in so far as it is prejudicial to
the interest of revenue, is opposed to law and the facts and circumstances of
the case.

2\. The CIT(A) erred in directing the AO to recompute the deduction allowable
u/s 10A of the I.T.Act after reducing the telecommunication expenses amounting
to Rs. 10,02,44,744/- from the total turnover also.

3\. The Ld. CIT(A) erred in not appreciating that there is no provision in
section 10A which requires the concerned expenses, which are required to be
reduced from 'the export turnover as per clause

(iv) of the Explanation to Section 10A to be reduced from the total turnover
also.

4\. The Ld. CIT(A) erred in not appreciating the fact that the jurisdictional
High Court decision in the case of M/s Tata Elxsi Ltd. relied upon by him has
not been accepted by the department ,and-a-SLP has been filed before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court which is pending.

5\. The CIT(A) erred in directing the AO to adopt 40% of the additional profit
arrived at by the AO as correct profit without any scientific basis which is
further reduced by the amount already offered i.e. Rs. 6,37,36,487/-, thereby
restricting the additional profit to Rs. 14,06,28,358/- as against the
addition of Rs. 44,71,75,626 made.

6\. The CIT(A) erred in not appreciating the fact the since M/s Google Ireland
Ltd. has neither filed return of income nor was willing to admit any
taxability in India, the additional profit of Rs. 44,71,75,626/- has been
taxed rightly in the hands of the assessee.

7\. The CIT(A) erred in not appreciating the fact the additional profit of Rs.
44,71,75,626 represents the profits evaded from being charged to income tax in
India of the service, Google Adwords run through the medium of Google website
in India

8\. The CIT(A) erred in not appreciating the fact as per the contract the
assessee is neither a captive service provider nor a cost centre to M/s Google
Ireland Ltd but the assessee claims to have be an independent distributor
acting on its own account.

9\. The CIT(A) erred, in not appreciating that in the facts and circumstances
of the case the assessee should have declared incomes with respect to its
revenues and not with respect to its cost as the whole agreement with Ms/
Google Ireland Ltd and the subsequent accounting treatment of adiftitting
income IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 224 of 331
only on 15.5% of the cost incurred in India to earn advertisement revenues is
a ploy to evade payment of axes in India.

10\. The CIT(A) erred, in not appreciating that it has been brought out in
great detail in the assessment order that the entire advertising business (
Adwords) is treated as one enterprise in India and that there is only one
profit earned out of the said enterprise.

11 The CIT(A) erred, in not appreciating the fact that, in the lack of a
better alternative, the profit has been worked out at the rate of 30.565% of
the total revenues i.e. Rs. 167,32,01,616/- in line with global profit of M/s
Google Inc. USA and the said profit of Rs. 51,09,12,113/- represents the
entire profit of the enterprise to be charged to tax in India in the hands of
M/s Google India Pvt. Ltd. as well as M/s Google Ireland Ltd.

12\. The CIT(A) erred, in not appreciating the fact that, out of the said
amount only a profit of Rs. 6,37,36,487/- is admitted in the hands of M/s
Google India Pvt. Ltd and the differential amount of Rs. 44,71,75,626/- has
been held to be the escaped profit of the enterprise in India, considering the
fact that Google Ireland Ltd. has neither filed its return if income nor is
willing to admit any taxability in India.

14\. For these and such other grounds that may be urged at the time of
hearing, it is humbly prayed that the order of the CIT(A) be reversed and that
of the Assessing Officer be restored.

15\. The appellant craves leave to add, to alter, to amend or delete any of
the grounds that may be urged at the time of hearing of the appeal.

175\. The brief facts on the impugned issues are that the AO has rejected the
books of accounts as per the provisions of section 145 of the Act and
calculated the disallowance of certain payments made to GIL by the appellant
on account of business profit under section 40(a)(ia) of the Act on non-
deduction of TDS. The assessee has challenged the rejection of books of
accounts and also the disallowance made under section 40(a)(ia) of the Act
before the CIT(A) but did not find favour with him. Now the assessee is before
us and his leanred Counsel Mr. Percy Pardiwala has invited our attention to
provisions of section 145 r.w.s. 144 of the Act with the submission that once
the books of accounts are rejected, the AO has to estimate the assessee's
income and no disallowance can be IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 225 of 331 made under different heads. The assessee had prepared its
financial statements for the year in accordance with law and the prescribed
accounting standards issued by ICAI and complete and consistent disclosures
including the notes to accounts have been made in the financial statements.
There had been no change in the financial policy followed by the assessee
during the year under consideration from the earlier years and the financial
statements of the assessee had been duly audited by an independent statutory
auditor. The AO has rejected the books of accounts having observed that the
form of reporting of the advertisement revenues in the profit and loss account
is not proper. There has been no finding of the AO that books of accounts were
unreliable or that entire revenue was not credited in the books of accounts
and it was not possible to compute the actual profit on the basis of the books
of accounts. The learned Counsel for the assessee further invited our
attention that after rejecting the books of accounts, the AO recasted the
profit and loss account without making any change in the revenue.

The learned Standing Counsel for the Revenue has placed a reliance upon the
order of the CIT(A).

176\. Having carefully examined the orders of lower authorities on this issue,
we find that AO has not pointed out the specific defect in maintenance of
books of accounts. Moreover, after recasting the profit and loss account,
there was no change in the profit originally reported by the assessee in its
financial statements. It is also noticed that assessee has been following the
same method of accounting in earlier years but it was never rejected by the
AO. We also find force in the contention of the learned Counsel for the
assessee that the lower authorities have not identified the accounting
standards that has to be followed by the assessees. In the light of these
facts, we are of the considered opinion that rejection of the books of
accounts by the AO is not proper. We IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 226 of 331 therefore set aside his order and direct the AO to accept the
books of accounts prepared by the assessee.

177\. So far as the disallowance on payments made by the assessee to GIL on
account of business profit under section 40(a)(ia) on non-deduction of TDS is
concerned, we find that during the impugned assessment year i.e., 2008-09, the
Tribunal has adjudicated the issue of the characterization of payments made by
the appellant and held it to be payment of royalty. Though the Hon'ble High
Court directed the Tribunal to adjudicate the issue of characterization of the
payments made by GIPL the appellant, to GIL, in other appeals of different
assessement years, but in the impugned assessment year i.e., 2008-09 the
Tribunal has taken a particular view with regard to characterization of
payment under the AdWord Distribution Agreement, we cannot ignore these facts.
Moreover, in foregoing appeals, we have re-examined the issue of
characterization of such payment to GIL and held it to be royalty. The claim
of bonafide for non-deduction of TDS on such pyment has already been examined
by us in the foregoing paras while adjudicating an issue as to wheather the
asseessee is to be held in default on non deduction of TDS and we did not find
any merit in the contention of the appellant that under a bonafide belief it
did not deduct the TDS on such payment. Therefore, we do not find any
justification to readjudicate the same issue again in this appeal. Hence, we
do not any infirmity in the order of the CIT(A) and we accordingly confirm the
same. Accordingly ground Nos. 5 to 16 in the assessee's appeal and ground Nos.
5 to 13 in the Revenue's appeal are disposed off.

178\. So far as the ground Nos. 10 to 12 in IT(TP)A No. 374/Bang/2013 and
ground Nos. 5 to 7 and 12 in IT(TP)A No. 466/Bang/2013 relating to
disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) with regard to additional profit computed
by the AO on the basis of transfer IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 227 of 331 pricing adjustment are concerned, we are of the view that
since in the transfer pricing appeals the issue of computation of arm's length
price of payment made under Google AdWord Program by GIPL to GIL has been
restored back to the AO / TPO for recomputation of arm's length price in terms
of directions issued by Tribunal, the disallowance of additional profit
calculated on the basis of transfer pricing adjustment, cannot be made under
section 40(a)(ia) of the Act. We therefore set aside the order of CIT(A) and
delete the disallowance made in this regard.

Ground No. 18 of assesse's appeal relating to initiation of penalty
proceedings under section 271(1)(c) is premature and we dismiss the same.

179\. During the course of hearing of the appeal, the Revenue has also moved
an application for the admission of additional grounds with the submission
that assessee has accepted in the written submissions filled before the
Tribunal that it is providing services through ITES division in connection
with the distribution of the advertisement by way of Ad- review in compliance
of the local laws. The additional grounds raised are extracted as under:

> 1\. The assessee is appointed as non-exclusive authorised distributor of
> adword program to the advertisers in India by Google Ireland. Under the
> Google Adword Program Distribution Agreement dated 12/12/2005, the assessee
> has been granted marketing and distribution rights of adword program to the
> advertisers in India. Clause 3.4 of the distribution agreement provides for
> minimum level of service as specified in Exhibit - C. Exhibit -C to the
> adword agreement refers to service level agreement and imposes
> responsibility for providing services to the customers (advertisers). All
> advertisers are instructed to contact the assessee directly for support. In
> view of the specific obligation to provide presale and Post sale support by
> the assessee to the advertisers, the assessee is providing the same as per
> service agreement dated 1/4/2004.

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 228 of 331

> 2\. The above aspect has been admitted by the assessee in its written
> submissions filed in IT(TP)A.No.1511 to 1516/B/2013 arising out of,
> proceedings under section 201 of the Act.

> 1\. The assessee in the written submissions has accepted that it is
> providing services through ITES division in connection with the distribution
> of advertisement by way of review with respect to the compliance of the
> local laws. It is further admitted that the assessee performs ad review
> services under ITES agreement with Google Ireland for which assessee is
> separately compensated. It is the specific contention of the revenue that
> this amount received by the assessee from Google Ireland for rendering
> services the in India to the advertisers is claimed as export under section
> 10A of the Act.

> 2\. The above aspect is a question of law which can be considered by this
> Hon'ble tribunal at this stage. Further the above activities were not
> disclosed by the assessee in the course of any proceedings except before
> this Hon'ble tribunal by way of written submissions in the appeal involving
> applicability of section 195 of the Act.

> 3\. As held by the Apex Court, additional ground which is question of law
> can be raised and entertained at any stage. The application of section 10A
> of the Act without there being any export of article or thing or computer
> software is question of law.

180\. In support of request for admission of the additional grounds, the
learned Standing Counsel further contended that it was admitted by the
assessee that it performs ad review services under ITES division with Google
Ireland for which the assessee was separately compensated. Therefore in the
light of specific contentions that the amount received by the assessee from
Google Ireland for rendering services in India to the advertisers cannot be
claimed as exemption under section 10A of the Act. Since this aspect was not
examined by the AO, the additional grounds now may be admitted and matter be
restored to the AO for its adjudication in accordance with law. The learned
Counsel for the assessee strongly objected the application for the admission
of the additional grounds with the submissions that this ground was never
raised either before the CIT(A) or before IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 229 of 331 the Tribunal at the time of filing of the
appeal. Moreover, this ground was also not raised before the Tribunal at the
time of hearing of the appeal by different bench. Now this ground has been
raised at the advanced stage of the hearing of the appeal. The learned Counsel
Mr. Percy Pardiwala further contended that AO has not raised the dispute in
this regard during the course of assessment proceedings. Therefore, these
grounds cannot be raised at this stage. He further placed reliance upon the
judgments in the case of Hukumchand Mills Ltd., Vs. CIT 63 ITR 232 (SC) and M
Corp Global Pvt. Ltd., Vs. CIT 178 taxmann.com 347 (SC), Instrade Corporation
Ltd., Vs. ACIT 62 taxmann.com 239 (Karnataka High Court) in support of his
contention that Tribunal has no power to enhance the income of the assessee.
If the additional grounds are admitted and matter is restored to the AO, the
AO will recompute the deduction under section 10A resulting into enhancement
of the Income. Therefore, the additional grounds cannot be admitted.

181\. Having carefully examined the order of authorities below in this regard,
we find that AO has accepted the claim of deduction under section 10A of the
Act and he has not raised any dispute with regard to amount received by the
assessee from Google Ireland for rendering services in India to the
advertisers which was claimed as export proceeds under section 10A of the Act.
It is also a settled position of law that at the second appellate stage, the
Revenue cannot improve upon the case made out by the AO. There are various
provisions under the Income Tax Act where the Revenue can rectify its mistakes
but before the Tribunal no additional grounds can be raised which was not a
subject matter of appeal or dispute before the lower authorities. The
Tribunal, being a second appellate authority, is supposed to adjudicate those
issues which were raised before it and also was of subject matter of dispute
before the lower authorities. The Revenue cannot improve upon its case.
Therefore, we are of the view that additional grounds raised by the Revenue
are not admissible and we accordingly reject the same.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 230 of 331

182\. Ground Nos. 2 to 4 in the Revenue's appeal relate to the computation of
deduction under section 10A and in this regard, the learned Counsel for the
assessee has contended that this ground is covered by the judgment of
jurisdictional High Court in the case of Tata Elxsi 349 ITR 98 and the view
taken by jurisdictional High Court has also been confirmed by the Hon'ble Apex
Court. Therefore, no interference in the order of the CIT(A) is called for.

The learned Standing Counsel placed reliance upon the order of the AO.

183\. Having carefully examined the order of authorities below, we find that
CIT(A) has adjudicated the issue in the light of judgment of jurisdictional
High Court in the case of CIT Vs. Tata Elxsi Ltd., (supra) and the judgment of
Tata Elxsi has been approved by the Hon'ble Apex Court. Since the CIT(A) has
adjudicated the issue in the light of judgment of jurisdictional High Court,
we find no infirmity in his order and accordingly we confirm the same in this
regard. Accordingly, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed and that of
the Revenue is dimissed.

184\. IT(IT)A No. 2845/Bang/2017 This appeal is filed by the assessee against
the order of the CIT(A) on following grounds:

1\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the order
passed by the Assessing Officer (Id. AO') u/s 143(3)/ 147/ 144 C(5) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 ('the Act), wherein income of Rs. 93,66.27,879 has been
assessed as being in the nature of 'Royalty' is bad in law as the same has
been passed by completely misconstruing the facts of the case and is based on
an incorrect interpretation of the provisions of the Act read with Double
taxation Avoidance Agreement between IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 231 of 331 India and Ireland (`DTAA'). Therefore, the said order as well
as the consequent demand is liable to be quashed.

2\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the impugned
order is bad in law in-as-much-as the initiation of re-assessment proceedings
on the purported 'Reasons to believe are based on incorrect inference drawn by
the Ld. AO from the information available with him.

3\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the impugned
order is bad in law as the reassessment proceedings that were initiated based
on 'Reasons to believe' only considered the provisions of the Act and failed
to consider that the Appellant, being a tax resident of Ireland was entitled
to claim relief under the DTAA, to the extent beneficial vis-a-vis the
provisions of the Act.

4\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law. the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred in relying on the orders passed under section 201 of the
Act in the case of Google India Pvt Ltd ('Google India') and not appreciating
that it is a trite law that primary assessment has to be made in the hands of
the non-resident payee of taxability of income. if any. and that orders u/s
201 in the hands of the payer is consequential.

5\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law. the order
passed by the Assessing Officer (`A0') u/s 143(3)/ 147/ 144 C(5) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 ('the Act'). wherein income of Rs. 93,66,27,879 has been
assessed as being in the nature of 'Royalty' is bad in law as the same suffers
from jurisdictional errors and is barred by limitation.. Therefore, the said
order as well as the consequent demand is liable to be quashed.

6\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the impugned
order is bad in law. as the statutory notice for assessment u/s 143(2) of the
Act was served on the Appellant on 16 February 2016, beyond the statutory time
limit for service of such notice, thereby, the entire proceedings conducted by
the Ld. AO and the order pursuant thereto are null and void. being barred by
limitation.

7\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Hon'ble
DRP has erred in rejecting the objection of the Appellant on non-'`service" of
notice IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 232 of 331
u/s 143(2) of the Act that was purportedly "issued" by the AO on 28 August.
2014. but was not "served" on the Appellant, failing which, the entire
proceedings for re-assessment and the consequential order/ demand is void and
is liable to be quashed.

8\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the re-
assessment proceedings are bad in law since the notice u/s 143(2) of the Act
was not even issued before the timeline for receipt of the said notice by the
Appellant. as per provision of the Act.

9\. Without prejudice to the grounds above, the conduct of re-assessment
proceedings based on the notice under section 143(2) of the Act purportedly
issued on 28 August 2014 even before furnishing of 'Reasons to believe' to the
Appellant is bad in law. being against the established law and procedure of
conduct of re- assessment proceedings as laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of GKN Driveshafts (India) Ltd v ITO (2003) (259 ITR 19)
(SC).

10\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
reassessment proceedings are bad in law as the 'Reasons to believe' were
furnished to the Appellant beyond reasonable time from the date of filing of
letter by the Appellant requesting for furnishing of reasons pursuant to which
the re-assessment proceedings were initiated by the Ld. AO.

11\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law. the
reassessment proceedings are bad in law as the notice under section 148 of the
Act does not mention the approval obtained by the Ld. AO from the prescribed
authority as required under section 151 of the Act and also held by the
Hon'ble Mumbai Tribunal in the case of GTL Ltd. Vs. ACIT (59 taxmann.com 362).

12\. On the facts and circumstances of the case. the Ld. AO has erred in
making following incorrect assumptions/ factual incorrect statements:

a) That Google India has entered into a service agreement with the Appellant
to render software development services.

b) That the agreement entered into by the Appellant with the advertisers is
similar to the agreement entered into by the Appellant and Google India.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 233 of 331

c) That as per the distribution agreement Google India is licensed to use the
AdWords Program in India and has obtained the right to use the IP of Google.

d) That as per the distribution agreement Google India has obtained the
license to sell right to use Adwords program to advertisers in India

e) That Advertisers are given the right to use the copyright in the software
while using a Google service like AdVVors program

f) That Google India cannot distribute the advertising space to Indian
customers under AdWords program without the use of or right to use the IP,
know-how, trademark.

g) That without access to the back end portion of the AdWords program, Google
India cannot perform its activities of marketing and distribution.

h) That by allowing Google India to market and distribute AdWords program,
Appellant had decided to share the profits from the AdWords program over which
it holds copyright.

i) That Appellant has permitted Google India to exploit and use the AdWords
program and in return Google India has agreed to pay a share of the profit to
Google Ireland which holds the license over the AdWords program.

j) Google India has to review the search results to ensure outcome of the
desired results or to improve upon quality of the search results.

k) Under the ITES service agreement. Google India is given the rights to use
the Intellectual Property related to internet search technology, advertising
system, products and services

13\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred in holding that the amounts receivable by the Appellant
from sale of online advertisement space under the AdWords Program from Google
India is taxable as `Royalty' income under the Act as well as under the DTAA.

14\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred in holding that the amounts receivable by the Appellant
from Google India towards sale of online advertisement space under the Ad
Words IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 234 of 331
Program is taxable as 'Royalty' under various sub-clauses of Explanation 2 to
section 9(1)(vi) of the Act.

15\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP erred in holding that the income from other advertisers amounting
to INR 510,874,532 in India towards sale of online ad space is chargeable to
tax as 'Royalty' under the Act and the DTAA and without following the
decisions by the Hon'ble Kolkata Tribunal in the case of ITO vs. Right
Florists (P.) Ltd. (154 TTJ

142) and Hon'ble Mumbai Tribunal in the case of Pinstorm Technologies vs ITO
(54 SOT 78) squarely applicable to the facts of the present case.

16\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO
has erred in holding that the payment received from direct advertisers
pertains to the use or right to use of Copyright in the computer programme and
therefore, taxable as royalty in India.

17\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO
has erred in relying on the decision of Delhi Tribunal in the case of
Microsoft (134 TTJ

257) and holding that there is no distinction between the provisions of the
Act and the DTAA with respect to the taxation of Royalty.

18\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred at one side holding that the above mentioned decisions
are not applicable to the facts of the Appellant by stating that in
Appellant's case the issue pertains to grant of rights by appellant to Google
India and on other hand not following the Tribunal decisions in case of direct
advertisers. The Ld. AO has further erred in distinguishing the decision of
Mumbai Tribunal in the case of Yahoo India Pvt. Ltd. (140 TTJ 195) without
appreciating that the similar facts are involved in the case of the Appellant.

19\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law. the Ld. AO
has erred in inter-alia holdingas under:

a) That the AdWords Program is a complex computer software and consideration
paid by Google India to Appellant is for granting of license to use the
copyright in the Ad Words program as specified in section 14(a)(iii)
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 235 of 331 and 14(b)(ii),
without appreciating that the said consideration was payable by Google India
in the subject year and no licensing of copyright is involved in the case of
Appellant and only a sale of online advertisement space under the said AdWords
Program.

b) That the consideration paid by Google India to Appellant is for granting of
license to use the copyright in the AdWords program without appreciating that
that the said consideration was payable by Google India in the subject year
and that Google India is only a distributor engaged in purchase and sale of an
online Ad space and not engaged in exploitation of any copyright or other
intangible property subsists in it, which would result in any royalty payment
to the Appellant.

c) That non-exclusive right is also covered under the Copyright Act while the
Act specifically provides that the Copyright means the exclusive rights to do
or authorise the doing of any of the acts mentioned in section 14 of the
Copyright Act.

d) That the Ld. AO in para 5.18 of the impugned order has mentioned that the
very nature of software is that it, being a computer programme. cannot be sold
without the transaction involving some transfer of copyright.

20\. Without prejudice to the grounds above, the Ld. AO/ Hon'ble DRP has erred
in not appreciating that the clauses of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) are
mutually exclusive and same amount receivable by the Appellant from Google
India towards sale of online advertisement space under the AdWords Program
cannot be taxed under multiple clauses of the said Explanation.

21\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred in disregarding the judicial precedents squarely
applicable to the facts of the Appellant and not considering the reliance
placed by the Appellant on the High Powered Committee constituted by the
Central Board of Direct Taxes vide Notification No. F No 500/ 122/ 99 dated
December 16, 1999.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 236 of 331

22\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred in placing reliance on the judicial precedents which are
not applicable to the case of the Appellant.

23\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/ DRP
erred in stating that the reliance placed by the Appellant on various case
laws is distinguishable without pointing out the distinction, particularly in
decided cases where the Appellant was the payee in respect of transaction of
sale of online advertisement space online to the Indian advertisers under the
AdWords Program.

24\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/
Hon'ble DRP has erred in misconstruing the distribution agreement between the
Appellant and Google India dated 12 December 2005 by stating that the said
agreement is for use of software and other IP of the Appellant, which
tantamounts to re-writing of the agreement which is not permissible under the
law as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of CIT vs Motor & General
Stores Pvt. Ltd. (66 ITR 692) (SC).

25\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has
erred in holding that the distribution agreement are complemented by the IT
Enabled Services agreement entered into by the Appellant with Google India
dated 1.4.2004 CITES agreement') and therefore, amounts receivable by the
Appellant from sale of online advertisement space on AdWords Program was in
the nature of Royalty.

26\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has
erred in not appreciating that the ITES agreement has no connection whatsoever
with the distribution agreement under which the Appellant distributes
advertisement space to Google India and which has nothing to do with the ITES
agreement. The linkage between the two agreements is erroneous given that the
Google India started providing ITES agreement related services in the year
2004 and the distribution activity started only in the end of 2005.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 237 of 331

27\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has
erred in concluding that Appellant's obligation under the Distribution
Agreement was nterconnected with the obligation of the Appellant under the
ITES segment.

28\. Without prejudice to the above grounds and on the facts and circumstances
of the case and in law, the Ld. AO erred in holding that by virtue of ITES
agreement dated 01.04.2004 for rendering of Ad-review services by the ITES
division results in use/ access to IP tools, confidential information, data
etc. Ld. AO failed to appreciate that the Ad review process done by the ITES
division comprises of approximately 6% of the total Ads that are reviewed and
consequently 94% of the Ads which are reviewed automatically, without any
involvement of the ITES division and therefore by no stretch of any
imagination there could be any access to or use of IP tools, confidential
information. data etc. for majority of the Ads.

29\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has
erred in holding that grant of right to use Google brand features and
trademark and Intellectual Property provided to Google India under the ITES
agreement is independent of the distribution agreement.

30\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has
erred in not appreciating that the right to use Google brand features and
trademark provided to Google India under the Distribution agreement was not
the main purpose of the Distribution agreement and was rather incidental to
the main purpose of distribution of online advertisement space and marketing
of AdWords Program in India.

31\. On the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has
erred in not appreciating that the right to use Google brand features and
trademark was granted merely for identification of Google India as the
distributor of online advertisement space and marketer of AdWords Program.

32\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law. the Ld. AO
has erred in contradicting with the order of Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer
(TPO') IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 238 of 331
and construing that the Appellant has given Copyright/ Copyright rights for
further exploitation to Google India while the TPO has accepted the said
transaction in the nature of distribution and marketing of the AdWords Program
for the purpose of computing the Arm's Length Price.

33\. Without prejudice to the principal ground that the amount receivable is
not 'Royalty', the Ld. AO/ Hon'ble DRP has erred in not accepting that the
amounts receivable by the Appellant from Google India will be taxable as
*Royalty only in the year of receipt of actual amount i.e. in the Financial
Year 2014-15 as per the beneficial provisions of DTAA. Further the Ld. AO has
erred in not adjudicating on the said ground in the impugned order.

34\. Without prejudice to the above grounds and on the facts and circumstances
of the case and in law, the Ld. AO has erred in levying interest u/s 234B of
the Act without appreciating that any taxes payable by the Appellant were
deductible by the payers at source in India and therefore no such interest is
leviable on the Appellant which is in consonance with the judicial precedents
on this issue, including the decision of Hon'ble Special Bench of Delhi
Tribunal in the case of Motorola Inc. (96 TTJ 1).

35\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO
has erred in levying interest under section 234A of the Act.

185\. Though various grounds are raised by the assessee but they all relate to
the validity of the reopening of the assessment, characterization of payment
made by the GIPL to GIL under AdWord Program and chargeability of interest
under section 234A and 234B of the Act.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 239 of 331

186\. With regard to validity of the reopening of the assessment, the learned
Counsel for the assessee has contended that AO has initiated the proceedings
for the assessment year 2007-08 under section 147 of the Income Tax Act
(hereinafter called as an "Act"), and issued a notice under section 148 dated
29.03.2014. In compliance thereof, the appellant, Google Ireland Ltd.,
furnished the return of income and objected the reasons furnished by the AO.
Although appellant was not served with the notice under section 143(2) of the
Act, but the objection in this regard has been raised before the AO and
thereafter transfer pricing proceedings was initiated by the TPO. The learned
Counsel for the assessee has further submitted that the reassessment
proceedings under section 147 was initiated by the AO without having any
jurisdiction. The learned Counsel for the assesse further contended that as
per judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of GKN Driveshafts
(India) Ltd. Vs. ITO 259 ITR 19 the AO has to dispose off the objections filed
against the reasons for reopening the assessment by passing a speaking order
before proceeding with the assessment. It was further contended that before
disposing of the objections filed by the assessee, the AO cannot proceed with
the assessment. Therefore notice under section 143(2) cannot be issued before
disposing of the objections against the reasons for reopening filed by the
assessee. In the present case, notice under section 143(2) is stated to have
been issued prior to providing the reasons for reassessment and for this
reason alone the reassessment proceeding should IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 240 of 331 be held invalid. The learned Counsel
for the assessee further contended that notice under section 143(2) was issued
on 16.02.2016 along with notice under section 142(1) of the Act. Thus the
notice is time barred as it was issued beyond the prescribed period.

Therefore, assessment framed consequent thereto deserves to be quashed. It was
further contended that while exercising jurisdiction under section 147 of the
Act, the AO should have reason to believe that income has escaped assessment
and secondly appropriate sanction in terms of section 151of the Act must be
obtained. It was further contended that the notice was issued by ACIT without
having a proper approval from the JCIT.

Therefore, the assumption of jurisdiction is not proper.

187\. The learned Standing Counsel, on the other hand, has contended that the
assessee, Google Ireland is a non-resident and has not filed any return of
income in India. The AO on the basis of the assessment framed in the case of
the payer i.e., GIPL, formed a belief that income chargeable to tax in the
hands of the appellant has escaped assessment.The learned Standing Counsel
further contended that AO is not required to wait for filing of the objections
against the reasons recorded for reopening of the assessment, for issuing a
notice under section 143(2) of the Act. Once the returns are filed in response
to notice under section 148 of the Act, the AO is at liberty to issue a notice
under section 143(2) of the Act within the prescribed period. The learned
Standing Counsel further contended that due approval was obtained by the JCIT
and the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 241 of 331
copy of the approval is also placed on record by the learned Standing Counsel.
He has also invited our attention to the order sheets with the submission that
assessee has filed the return of income on 20.08.2014 in response to notice
under section 148 of the Act and on the same day the AO issued a notice under
section 143(2) of the Act. In support of his contention he has filed the copy
of the order sheets. The learned Standing Counsel for the Revenue further
contended that order sheet recorded by the AO in the course of discharge of
official duty is presumed to be correct unless contrary is proved. In the
order sheet, it is clearly mentioned that notice under section 143(2) was
issued on 28.08.2014, therefore contention of the assessee cannot be accepted
that notice was not issued in time. The learned Standing Counsel has placed
the reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Rajesh Javeri
Stock Broker 291 ITR 500 in support of his contention that the prima facie
belief is required to be formed by the AO to reopen the assessment.

188\. Having carefully examined the orders of authorities below, in the light
of rival submission in this regard, we find that the assessee has disputed the
reopening of the assessment mainly on two aspects, one is that the AO has
reopened the assessment without forming a belief that income chargeable to tax
has escaped the assessment and secondly the notice under section 143(2) was
not issued within the prescribed period.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 242 of 331 Before proceeding to
deal with the issues on merit, we want to record certain facts hereunder:

189\. Notice under section 148 was issued on 16.04.2014 according to the
assessee. The assessee has filed the return of income on 14.08.2014 in
response to notice under section 148 of the Act. On 20.08.2014, the AO has
taken a note that assessee has filed the return of income in response to
notice under section 148 of the Act and the case was selected for scrutiny.He
accordingly issued notice under section 143(2) of the Act. Thereafter the
proceedings were commenced on 24.07.2015 and reasons for reopening the
assessment was communicated to the assessee on 24.07.2015 and on 16.09.2015,
assessee filed the objections. The objections filed by the assessee were
disposed off by the AO and thereafter again a notice under section 143(2) was
issued to the assessee along with questionnaire under section 142(1) of the
Act. While issuing second time notice under section 143(2), the AO has
categorically recorded in the order sheet that fresh notice under section 142
is issued to the assessee; meaning thereby that earlier notice was also issued
on 28.08.2004. Nothing has been placed on record on behalf of the assessee to
dispute the minutes of the proceedings recorded by the AO during the course of
assessment except the oral contentions. Copy of the proceedings recordedby the
AO are placed on record. We, therefore, find no merit in the oral submissions
with regard to the non-issuance of the notice under section 143(2) within the
prescribed period IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 243 of 331
as it is a settled position of law that the minutes or the order sheet
recorded in discharge of official duty are correct unless and until contrary
is proved in view of section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Therefore,
we are of the view that notice under section 143(2) was issued in time.
Moreover, we do not find any procedure either in the Act or in Income Tax
Rules wherein it has been laid down that after issuance of notice under
section 148, the returns are to be filed and thereafter assessee has to seek
the reasons recorded for reopening of the assessment and thereafter file the
objection thereto. After disposal of the objections the AO can only issue the
notice under section 143(2) of the Act. For completing the assessment under
section 147 of the Act, the procedure laid down under section 143 of the Act
is to be followed. Nowhere it has been mentioned either under section 143 or
under section 147 of the Act that the notice under section 143(2) cannot be
issued before disposing of the objections filed by the assessee against the
reasons recorded for reopening the assessment. Accordingly, we find no merit
in the contention of the assessee that the notice under section 143(2) is bad
in law.

With regard to other arguments of the asseessee that AO has not formed a
proper belief that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment, we find
that the asseessee has not filed any return of income and in the hands of
payer, the AO treated the payments made to the payee ie. the asseessee to be
royality though the payer claimed it to be business profit in the hands of the
asseessee. In view of the judgement of the Apex court in the IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 244 of 331 case of Rajesh Javeri Stock
Brokers(Pvt) Ltd (supra) the AO is required to form a prima facie belief that
income chargeable to tax has escaped asseesseement and not to make out a full
proof case. From a carefull reading of the reasons recorded for reopening the
asseesseement we are of the view that the AO has formed a primafacie belief
that income chargeable to tax has escaped asseesseement. and we therefore hold
that reopening is valid.

190\. So far as assessment on merit is concerned, we find that Revenue has
assessed the appellant on business profit received by it after treating the
GIPL as its Permanent Establishment in India. The issue of characterization of
the payment made by the GIPL to GIL has already been adjudicated by us in the
appeals filed by GIPL and we have taken a view that the payments made by GIPL
to GIL under the Google AdWord Distribution Agreement is payment of royalty,
therefore the receipts in the hands of GIL cannot be treated to be business
profit in the hands of the GIL. The GIL and GIPL were dealing on principal to
principal basis. Therefore, GIPL cannot be called to be the Permanent
Establishment of the GIL. In the light of these facts, we are of the view that
Revenue has wrongly assessed the GIL for business profit received by it under
AdWord Distribution Agreement. Moreover, during the course of hearing, the
learned Standing Counsel has candidly admitted that now the Revenue's stand is
very clear that the payment made by the GIPL to GIL is in the nature of
royalty and not the business profit IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 245 of 331 received by the GIL. Therefore, we are of the considered
opinion that assessment of business profit in the hands of GIL after treating
the GIPL as Permanent Establishment of the GIL is not proper. Even if the
royalty is to be paid by the GIPL to GIL the tax is to deducted on its payment
and benefit of the same will be given to GIL while completing the assessment
in its hands. Therefore, we set aside the order of CIT(A) and restore the
matter to the AO with a direction to reframe the assessment in the light of
the observations of the Tribunal in the foregoing paras and also in accordance
with law.

Accordingly, this appeal is partly allowed for statistical purposes.

191\. IT(TP)A Nos. 69/Bang/2014, 191/Bang/2014, 68/Bang/2014, 205/Bang/2015,
559/Bang/2016, 881/Bang/2016, 387/Bang/2017, ITA No.1299/Bang/2015 These are
cross appeals filed by the assessee-company as well as the revenue directed
against respective final assessment orders passed u/s.143(3) r.w.s.144C of the
Act, for the assessment years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12,.

192\. For the sake of clarity and convenience, facts relevant to the
assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014 (filed by the assessee) and
IT(TP)A No.191/Bang/2014 (filed by the Revenue) are stated herein.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 246 of 331

193\. Briefly the facts of the case are as under. The assessee is a company
duly incorporated under the provisions of Companies Act, 1956. It is a wholly
owned subsidiary of Google International LLC, USA. It has STPI units at
Hyderabad and Gurgaon. It is engaged in the business of providing IT services
as well as IT enabled Services (ITes) and also Marketing and Distribution of
AdWords programme to its group companies including Google Inc and Google
Ireland and other group of companies. It filed return of income for the
assessment year 2009-10 on 30.09.2009 and later revised declaring total income
of Rs.16,57,21,800/- after claiming deduction of Rs.184,32,46,295/- u/s.10A of
the Income-tax Act. The assessee-company also reported the following
international transactions with its AE in form 3CEB :

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 247 of 331 Particulars in
> respect of purchase of other tangible property Clause 8C INR Amount
> paid/payable Name and address of the Description of As per books of As
> computed Method used for associated the property account by determining
> arm's Nature of units enterprise with whom the and nature of assessee length
> of international transaction having price (see section each property
> transaction has been regard to the 92C(1) entered into arm's length price
> Clause Clause Clause Clause 8C(a) 8C(b) 8C(c) Clause 8C(d)(i) 8C(d)(ii)
> Clause 8C(e) Google Ireland Limited Purchase of fixed Items are 150,322,120
> 150,322,120 Refer note below 1st& 2nd Floor, assets and numerous in Gordon
> House equipment quantity and Barrow Street, Dublin 4 hence Ireland
> quantitative information cannot be given Google Inc Purchase of fixed Items
> are 12,294,215 12,294,215 Refer note below 1600 Amphitheatre assets and
> numerous in Parkway, equipment quantity and Mountain View CA 94043 hence
> quantitative information cannot be given Google IT China Co.Ltd. Purchase of
> fixed Items are 124,188 124,188 Refer note below No.1 Zhongguancun East
> assets and numerous in Road, equipment quantity and Haidian District hence
> Beijing 1084 quantitative information cannot be given Total 162,740,523
> 162,740,523 The total amount paid/payable to associated enterprises for the
> purchase of the capital goods is Rs.162,740,523/-

as per books of account Further the said amount of Rs.162,740,523/- has been
determined/computed by the assessee having regard to the arm's length price on
application of the Comparable Uncontrolled Price method as prescribed under
section 92C/92 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the laws and government orders
(customs regulations) in force as prescribed in Rule 10B(2)(d) of the Income
Tax Rules,1962 IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 248 of 331
Particulars in respect of sale of other tangible property Clause 8 C INR
Amount paid/payable Description of the As per books As computed by Method Name
and address of the property of Assessee having used for associated and nature
of account regard to the determining enterprise with whom the Nature of units
of transaction arm's arm's international each property length price length
transaction has been price (see entered into section 92C(1) Clause Clause
clause 8C(a)) Clause 8C(b) Clause 8C(c) 8C(d)(i) Clause 8C(d)(ii) 8C(e) Google
IT China Co.Ltd. Sale of fixed assets Items are 278,468 278,468 Refer note
Tsinghua Science Park and equipment numerous in below Building 6, No.1
quantity and Zhongguancun East Road hence Haidian District quantitative
Beijing 1084 information cannot be given Google Singapore Pte Sale of fixed
assets Items are 2,824,249 2,824,249 Refer note Ltd. and equipment numerous in
below #38-01/01A quantity and 8 Shenolon Way hence Singpore 068811
quantitative information cannot be given Total 3,102,717 3,102,717 The total
amount received/receivable from associated enterprises for the sale of the
capital goods is Rs.3,102,717/- as per books of account Further the said
amount of 3,102,717/- has also been determined/computed by the assessee having
regard to the arm's length price on application of the Comparable Uncontrolled
Price method as prescribed under section 92C/92 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 249 of 331 Particulars in
respect of transactions in intangible property Clause 9 INR clause 9(a) Clause
9(b) Clause 9(c)(i) Clause 9(c)(ii) Clause 9(d) Google Ireland Payment of
1,681,852,823 1,681,852,823 Refer note below Limited, Ireland. fees for st nd
1 & 2 Floor, Gordon distribution House right* Barrow Street, Dubin 4 Ireland
Total 1,681,852,823 1,681,852,823 **Excludes the amount of Rs.16,052,689 which
is accounted for in financial year The total amount paid/payable to the
associated 2008-09 but has been considered for tax enterprises is
Rs.1,681,852,823/- as per books of purposes in financial year 2006-07 by
account revising the return of income for that year. The said amount of
Rs.1,681,852,823/- has been determined/computed by the assessee having regard
to arm's length price on application of the Transactional Net Margin Method as
prescribed under section 92C/92 of the Income-tax Act,1961 and the laws and
government orders in force (foreign exchange regulations) as mentioned in rule
10B(2)(d) of the Income-tax Rules, 1962 IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 250 of 331 Particulars in respect of rendering of services Clause 10 INR
Name and address of Amount received/receivable the associated Description of
As per books of As computed by Method used for enterprise with whom services
account assessee having determining the international provided regard to the
arm's length transaction has been arm's price (see entered into length price
section 92C(1) Clause 10(a) Clause 10(b) Clause 10(c)(i) Clause 10©(ii) Clause
10(d) Google Ireland Limited Informati9on 2,892,019,907 2,892,019,907 Refer
note 1st & 2nd Floor, technology below Gordon House enabled Barrow Street,
Dublin 4 services Ireland Refer note Google Inc Information 2,483,571,117
2,483,571,117 below 1600 Amphitheatre technology Parkway, enabled Mountain
View CA services 94043 The total amount received/receivable from the
associated enterprises for rendering the services is Rs.5,375,591,024/- as per
the books of account.

The said amount of Rs.5,375,591,024/- has been determined/computed by the
assessee having regard to arm's length price on application of the
Transactional Net M:argin Method as prescribed under section 92C/92 of the
;Income-tax Act,1961 IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 251 of 331 Particulars in respect of reimbursement of expenses Clause 13
INR Name and address of the Amount paid/payable associated Description of the
Method used for As per books of As computed by enterprise with whom the
property determining arm's account assessee having international and nature of
length regard to the transaction has been entered transaction price (see
section arm's into 92C(1) length price Clause Clause Clause 13(a) 13(b) Clause
13(c)(i) 13C(c)(ii) Clause 13(d) Google Inc.USA Reimbursement of 258,431,140
258,413,140 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway expenses Refer note below Mountain View
CA 94043 Google Ireland Ltd., Ireland Reimbursement of 914,271 914,271 Refer
note below 1st & 2nd Floor, Gordon House expenses Barrow street, Dublin 4
Ireland Google UK Ltd. Reimbursement of 8,389,091 8,389,091 Refer note below
Bedgrave House expenses 76 Buckingham Palace Road London SWIW91Q United
Kingdom Google Switzerland Reimbursement of 4,326,324 4,326,324 Refer note
below Brandschenkestrase 110 expenses 8002 Zurich Switzerland Googlle Austria
Pty.Ltd. Reimbursement of 2,259,127 2,259,127 Refer note below Google
Australia Pty.Ltd. expenses Level 5, 48 Pitrama Road, Permount, NSW 2009
Australia Total 274,319,953 274,319,953 The total amount paid/payable to the
associated enterprises in respect of reimbursement of expenses is
Rs.274,319,953/- as per the books of account..

The statement has been submitted without prejudice to the contention that
reimbursement of expenses is not an international transaction and in substance
such reimbursement transactions are with third parties.

The said transactions amounting to Rs. Rs.274,319,953/-

have been determined /computed by the assessee having regard to arms length
price on application of the Comparable Uncontrolled Price Method as prescribed
under section 92C/92 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 252 of 331 Particulars in respect of recovery
of expenses Clause 13 INR Amount paid/payable Name and address of the
Description of As per books of As computed Method used associated the property
account by for determining enterprise with whom and nature of assessee arm's
length the international transaction having price (see transaction has been
regard to the section 92C(1) entered into arm's length price Clause Clause
Clause 13(a) 13(b) Clause 13(c)(i) 13C(c)(ii) Clause 13(d) Google inc USA
Recovery 24,983,245 24,983,245 1600Amphitheatre expenses Refer note Parkway'
below Mountain View CA 94043 Google Singapore Pte.Ltd. Reimbursement 2,780,296
2,780,296 Refer note #38-01/01A of below 8 Shelton Way expenses Singapore
068811 Google Payment Limited Reimbursement 5,856,036 5,856,036 Refer note 1st
& 2nd Floor, Gordon of below House expenses Barrow Street, Dublim 4 Ireland
Total 33,619,577 33,619,577 The total amount received/receivable in respect of
recovery of expenses from the associated enterprises is Rs.33,619,577/- as per
the books of account..

The statement has been submitted without prejudice to the contention that
reimbursement of expenses is not an international transaction and in substance
such reimbursement transactions are with third parties.

The said transactions amounting to Rs.

Rs.33,619,577/- have been determined /computed by the assessee having regard
to arms length price on application of the Comparable Uncontrolled Price
Method as prescribed under section 92C/92 of the Income-tax Act, 1961
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 253 of 331

194\. The Assessing Officer (AO) referred the matter to the TPO with the
approval of the learned CIT, Bengaluru-1 for the purpose of determining the
ALP of the above international transactions. The TPO, vide order
dt.29.01.2013, passed u/s 92CA(3) of the Act, suggested ALP adjustment of
Rs.83,50,87,934/- in respect of international transactions with Google Ireland
on aggregate basis and of Rs.44,84,24,329/- in respect of IT services to
Google Inc, USA. While doing so, the TPO had analysed the TP study submitted
by the assesse-company, in para 2.2 of his order as under:

> "2.2 On perusal of group profile given on page 13 and 14 of the TP study it
> is observed that Google Inc. USA is the ultimate holding company of the
> group. Google Inc is a public and profitable company focused on search
> services. Google Inc is the legal owner of AdWords Software product, Brand
> Names, and all other related Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs). Google
> Inc. has given rights to use intangible assets to Google Ireland Holdings
> which is an Ireland based subsidiary of Google Inc. Google Ireland Holdings
> in turn has by license agreement given rights to use the same intangible
> assets to Google Netherlands Holdings BV; a Netherlands based subsidiary.
> Google Netherlands Holdings pays royalty to Google Ireland Holdings for the
> same. Google Netherlands Holdings again in turn by license agreement has
> given the rights to use these intangible assets to Google Ireland Limited;
> an Ireland based subsidiary. Google Ireland Limited pays royalty to Google
> Netherlands Holdings BV. Google Ireland Limited has entered into an
> agreement with Google India Limited on December 12, 2005 for distribution of
> AdWords program. In the TP Report the assessee has mentioned on page 13 that
> as per the agreement Google India has to market and distribute Ad Words
> Program to advertisers in the designated Territory, within the broad
> guidelines provided by Google Ireland Limited. It is mentioned on page 14 of
> the TP Report that Ad Words is an automated system under which advertisers
> purchase enhanced visibility in the Google website and manage their own
> accounts. Advertisers independently develop a set of Keywords that are
> related to their business and bid on a CPC basis. Advertisers submit bids
> for the dollar amount they are willing to pay to display their advertisement
> when those key words are queried by an internet user."

195\. The AO observed that in the TP study made by the assessee-company, an
attempt has been made to show that it is only a low-end service provider and
it had been suitably compensated by its AE. But the TPO had contradicted this
characterisation and observed IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 254 of 331 that the assessee should have furnished the FAR analysis of
each service rendered to its AE, instead of FAR analysis of the whole group
and observed as under:

> "3.0 TPO's finding: In depth study of transfer Pricing Study submitted by
> the assessee, salient features of which have been mentioned above, has
> convinced the undersigned that in the TP Study the attempt has been made to
> declare Google India as low end service provider and that it has been
> suitably compensated by the Associated Enterprises (AEs). But the facts
> brought on record in the TP study do not support this conclusion. Therefore,
> the conclusion that Google India is a low end service provider is in utter
> contradiction to what I have gathered on analysis of facts given in the TP
> Study. In this connection, please refer to the 3CEB Report dated 30th
> September 2009, which the assessee has filed in the Office of Additional
> Commissioner of Income Tax 30' September2009. In the report, I find that in
> respect to each international transaction name and address of associated
> enterprise with whom the international transaction has been entered into has
> been mentioned. The assessee has rendered to or taken from specific
> associated enterprise the specific service. Accordingly, as mentioned in the
> 3CEB report, Information Technology Services have been rendered by the
> assessee to Google Inc USA and the assessee has determined arm's length
> price (in short ALP) of the services at Rs 2,483,571,117.

Likewise, Information Technology Services have been rendered by the assessee
to Google Ireland Limited and ALP of the services has been determined at Rs
2,892,019,907. Payment of fees for distribution rights have been made by the
assessee to Google Ireland Limited and the ALP has been determined by the
assessee at Rs 1,681,852,823. This being the factual position in respect to
services rendered or taken by the assessee, the assessee should have furnished
for each service the FAR analysis of the assessee and the Associated
Enterprise concerned to whom the services have been rendered. As against it,
in the TP Study FAR analysis has been given of assessee on one hand and the
'whole group' on the other hand. FAR analysis furnished by the assessee in the
TP study, therefore, is not considered proper. How can the functions
performed, assets used and the risks incurred by the whole group can be taken
in to consideration with the functions performed, assets used and the risks
incurred by the assessee in respect to specific international transactions
undertaken by the assessee with specific Associated Enterprise. To be precise
Google India has under taken the international transactions of rendering IT
and ITES with Google Inc USA and Google Ireland Limited respectively, then the
FAR analysis should be made of Google India and Google Inc for IT services,
and Google India and Google Ireland Limited for ITES. Similarly in respect to
distribution rights in AdWords product the FAR analysis should be between
Google India and Google Ireland Limited. If in FAR analysis of Google India on
one hand and the whole group on the other hand is IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 255 of 331 made, Google India will always be
found inferior in terms of functions performed, assets used and the risks
incurred, as one enterprise or the other in the whole group would be
performing one function or the other, using asset and incurring different
risks and thus in unison group companies as a whole would be presenting very
impressive picture as compared to Google India. On page 48 of TP study in
respect to Marketing & Distribution of AdWords Program while comparative study
of functions, in respect to 'Product Intangible' it has been mentioned that
functions related to Development of research Program, Conduct of research,
Conduct of research for improving the existing products, testing of products,
and development of product have been performed by AE and Google India has not
performed these functions. It is wrong analysis. Ad Words product related
rights have been given to Google India by Google Ireland Limited. Google
Ireland is not the legal owner of AdWords Software Product. All IP rights in
it belong to Google Inc.USA. Google Ireland Limited, as discussed in para 2.2
through an arrangement which involves four layers of license agreements
amongst group companies, has given distribution rights in the Ad Words
Software related distribution rights to Google India. These four layers at the
expense of repetition are shown below-

Therefore, in this relationship Google India and Google Ireland Limited are
relevant and between the two Google India has performed functions related to
intangible product. Rather, Google India has performed significant functions
whereas Google Ireland Limited has not performed any function at all in this
regard. I find that Google India has performed IT services to GoolgeInc USA
almost every year. Position of IT services rendered by Google India to Google
Inc USA in this year and in two preceding years is as follows-

    
    
             Financial IT         services IT services Amount
             Year      rendered by         rendered to
              2006-07 Google India         Google Inc 1,181,826,53
                                           USA          9
             2007-08 Google India          Google Inc 1,981,054,354
                                           USA
              2008-09 Google India         Google Inc   2,483,571,117
    
    

Likewise Business strategy and conceptualization function has not been
performed by Google Ireland Limited. Some group company must have performed
this function but in respect to relevant international transactions in this
case Google India and Google Ireland Limited are relevant Companies and their
functions should be performed. Therefore, it cannot be said that Google
Ireland Limited has performed this function and Google India has not performed
this function. Market IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 256 of 331 Research activity Google India has performed but nothing can
be said about Google Ireland Limited as in the study on page 48 comparisons
has been made with the `Whole Group' which vitiates the comparison and makes
it unreliable. Likewise Development of Global Marketing Strategy cannot be
considered on the basis of TP Study as the function of Google Ireland Limited
as the study is not reliable due to comparison with the whole group and not
with Google India Limited alone. In respect to assets, once again intangible
assets on page 51 of TP study have been shown as belonging to AE. But in this
connection I repeat that Intangibles are legally owned by Google Inc USA,
whereas in respect to transactions related to distribution of AdWords Program
only Goolge Ireland Limited is relevant and I find that these assets do not
belong to Ireland Google Limited. Service level Quality risk mentioned on page
52 may be incurred by either the Google India which is providing services to
the customers and who has direct interaction with the customers or by Google
Inc USA which legally owns the intangible assets. As google Ireland Limited
has taken the rights to distribute the software based services under licensed
agreement from Google Netherlands HoldingsBV the risk is incurred by Google
India and not by Google Ireland Limited because Google Ireland Limited will
shift the risk to Google Netherlands Holdings BV. Likewise, ultimate
deliverable quality risk lies with Google Inc USA and not with Google Ireland
Limited. I also hold that Software Technology risk is not incurred by Google
Ireland Limited as software product is legally owned by Google Inc; USA. On
the basis of FAR analysis dissected by me, I find that characterization of
Google India as a low risk service provider , who assumes very less risk,
performs very limited functions and does not own any capital asset or valuable
intangible assets as concluded on page 53 in TP study is wrong conclusion and
cannot be relied upon. Rather when I compare Google India with Google Ireland
Limited I find in terms of functions performed, assets used and risks assumed,
Google India is a far more active participant compared to Google Ireland
Limited and therefore cannot be called as low end and low risk service
provider."

196\. The TPO, after perusal of the agreement of Google AdWords programme
dt.12.12.2005 entered into by the assessee-company and Google Ireland, had
concluded that the assessee-company is not marketing/distribution agent for
Google Ireland, but doing the business on its own account as it employed all
the assets and assumed the risks associated with the business. The TPO further
observed that Google Ireland is not a legal owner of AdWords Software
programme and the same were acquired by it through IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 257 of 331 an arrangement among the group
companies and therefore in order to find out the economic substance of the
transaction, the TPO also analysed the functions performed by different units
of the assessee-company and finally concluded that the ITeS business is
closely connected with the AdWords programme as they are not separable from
each other. The relevant finding of the TPO as given in para 3.2 of TPO's
order is reproduced herein below:

> "3.2 In para 2.1 above brief description has been made of the kind of work
> which has been done by different units of Google India. The description is
> based on the discussion given in the TP study submitted by the assessee. A
> part of it related to ITES Services and AdWords services are repeated here.
> STPI Units at Hyderabad and Gurgaon also perform (apart from IT Services)
> certain IT enabled services, which involve approving and administering of
> the advertisement. Hyderabad and Gurgaon Units are involved in performing
> back office functions for the Adwords Business such as approval of
> advertisements for the purpose of running the same on the google website. On
> page 13 it is mentioned that Google India has entered into an agreement with
> Google Ireland Ltd, Ireland for distribution of Adwords Program with its
> reasonable commercial expertise, own sales force and customer service
> infrastructure. The Delhi and Mumbai offices consist of direct sales teams
> (approximately 250 people in totality) which approach corporate and midsized
> advertisers in order to sell as apace for the Ad Words business. Therefore,
> ITES and AdWords business are not separable from each other. Further, in so
> far Intangibles are concerned it is not the use of AdWords Software Program
> that has contributed in earning of supernormal profit but also it is
> assessee's ITES efforts, dedicated sales team of 250 people in Delhi and
> Mumbai Offices, commercial expertise of employees of Google India, Customer
> service infrastructure established by Google India and the customer base
> which have committed to use Google Software to give their advertisements
> that has made equally salutary contribution in earning super profit. Google
> India's STPI Units at Bangalore and Hyderabad act as R&D Centers wherein
> certain Information Technology Services are performed. In Bangalore
> contracted R&D services in the nature of Google's Product development,
> product upgrades, product support, testing of products and product
> improvement are performed. In Bangalore Unit search results appearing on
> Google's website are reviewed; it enables Google to improve IT(IT)ANos.1190,
> 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013,
> 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
> IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 258 of 331 the quality of search results for
> end users across the world. (Please refer to search quality evaluation on
> page 11&12). Hyderabad facility also performs certain software development
> tasks in relations development of web-based language translator. Evaluation
> of Google Services and tools for efficiency, bugs, performance, failure and
> other aspects is also done in Bangalore. The Software is tested by the
> Hyderabad unit of Google India before it is ready for release. (please refer
> to QA Engineering on page 12). These IT services rendered by Google India to
> Google Inc. USA have also its bearing on total revenue earned by Google
> India. These Services cannot be called as low end routine services. These
> services do contribute towards the success of AdWords Software Program,
> which is legally owned by Google Inc USA. Therefore, in AdWords Marketing
> and distribution business the contribution of Google India is not routine or
> low end. Google India has apart from rendering IT and ITES Services to
> Google Inc USA and Google Ireland Limited respectively has contributed
> Intangible assets in earning super profits in Adwords Business. Therefore, I
> find the Cost Plus Mark up method used to evaluate the IT, ITES and AdWords
> Business efforts of Google India is absolutely improper. It is not
> considered as acceptable. This method ignores the extraordinary contribution
> made by Google India in providing IT, ITES Services, doing Marketing and
> distribution business and contributing Intangible assets to earn super
> profit. Therefore, I propose to also determine the Arm's Length Price of
> Intangible Assets contributed by Google India."

197\. Finally the TPO concluded that the entire transactions of the assessee-
company with its AEs cannot be considered in isolation since the assessee also
contributed towards the development of intangibles, namely, market intangibles
to Google Ireland Ltd., and Technology intangibles to Google Inc and gives the
possession of this valuable non- routine intangibles. All the transactions are
inter-related and inter-linked therefore, the TPO proposed to adopt residual
profit split method as the most appropriate method.

198\. In response to the show-cause notice issued by the TPO on the above
lines, the assessee-company made submissions vide its letter dt.04.12.2012.
After considering the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 259 of 331 reply, another show-cause notice was issued by the TPO on
04.12.2012 proposing that the assessee had also rendered R & D services to
Google Inc, USA and these services are high-end services and it cannot be
treated as a low-end service provider. Another show-cause notice dt.18.01.2013
was issued directing the assessee-company to furnish the FAR analysis of the
company performed by the assessee in respect of international transactions
disclosed in form 3 CEB report. On account of failure of the assessee- company
to furnish the FAR analysis of the functions performed by the assessee-
company in respect of international transactions with the AE, the TPO proposed
to reject the TP study submitted by the assessee-company. The TPO also
proposed to apply the residual profit split method, as the transactions
between the Google India and Google Ireland cannot be considered in isolation
because it deployed all routine valuable intangibles i.e. marketing
intangibles by Google India and Technology Intangible by Google Ireland Ltd.,
In TPO's view, because of presence of this valuable non-routine intangibles
and transactions being inter-related and inter-linked, had proceeded to apply
residual profit-split method after referring to the Guidelines of OECD on this
method. Accordingly the TPO had proceeded to arrive at arm's length price
based on the residual profit split method as under:

> "6.2 Profit Split Method 6.2.1 the OECD Guidelines provide ,for two
> different profit .split methods to determine taxable income associated with
> intercompany transactions: the 'comparable' profit split method and the
> 'residual' profit split method.

> Under the comparable profit split method the split used in comparable
> uncontrolled transaction is applied to the controlled transactions. The
> comparable profit split compares the division of operating profit among the
> controlled taxpayers to the division of operating profit among the
> uncontrolled taxpayers engaged in similar activities under similar
> circumstances. Because of the difficulty I obtaining the uncontrolled profit
> split information, including the iulbrmation needed for consisting
> accounting treatment, it as likely that the comparable profit split method
> will seldom be a viable approach.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 260 of 331 The residual profit
split method allocates operating profit or losses from controlled transactions
in proportion to the relative contributions made by each party in creating the
combined profits or losses. Relative contributions may be determined by
functions peiforined, risks assumed, resources employed, costs incurred and
value drivers contributed to the overall business.

According to paragraph 3.5 of the 1995 OECD report, " the profit split method
.first identifies the profit to be split for the associated enterprises from?,
the controlled transactions in which the associated enterprises are engaged.
It then splits those profits between the associated enterprises on an
economically valid basis that approximates the division of profits that would
have been anticipated and reflected in an agreement made at arm's length"

The Method is generally used where multiple entities, operating in an
integrated manner, contribute to a large extent, to the creation of valuable
business drivers that add to future growth prospects of the company as a
whole. Applying the profit split would mean splitting any (residual) profit
between the entities on all sides of transaction.

Paragraph 3.5 and 3.7 of the OECD guidelines mention that where transactions
are very interrelated, it might be that they cannot be evaluated on a separate
basis. Independent companies might under similar circumstances, decide to set
up a partnership' and agree to a form of profit split. The strength of the
profit split method is that it is less likely that either party to the
controlled transaction will be left with an extreme and improbable profit
result since all the parties to the transaction are evaluated. This multi-
sided approach may also be used to achieve a division of profits from
economies of scale or other joint efficiencies that satisfied both the
taxpayer and tax administration.

Paragraph 3.11 of the OECD guidelines stresses that if the profit split method
were to be used by the associated enterprises to establish transfer pricing in
controlled transactions, ten each associated enterprise would seek to achieve
the division of prof that independently would have expected to realize in a
joint relationship. Generally, conditions established in this manner would
have to be based upon projected profits rather• than actual profits, because
it is not possible for the taxpayer to know what the profits of the business
activity would be at time the conditions are established.

6.2.2 in the instant case the international transactions between Google India
and Google Ireland are the fees paid by Google India for import of
distribution rights, Information Technology Enabled Services rendered by
Google India to Google Ireland and Provision of sales and marketing services
by Google India to Google Ireland. However, the above transactions cannot be
considered in isolation since the parties viz Google India and Google Ireland
deploy valuable intangibles IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 261 of 331 viz the customer base of Google India and Technology IPR of
Google Ireland. Due to presence of valuable non-routine intangibles and also
as the transactions (routine transactions such as provision of contract 1TE
Services and marketing services and the non-routine transactions involving
intangibles) are all interrelated and inter-linked., the residual profit split
(RPSM) is selected as the most appropriate method.

The residual profit split method provides a routine return for routine
services and also accommodates a compensation for non-routine services and
investment in non-routine assets; hence it is considered to be the most
reliable method to evaluate the license fees received for Ad-words by Google
Ireland, and it also provides the best level of conformity to the OECD
Guidelines.

Identification of total cost for the different activities Step 1 performed by
Google India Assignment of a routine return for the contract IT Step 2 Enabled
Services performed by Google India for Google Ireland Ascertaining the
residual profit by carving out the Step 3 routine return profits from the
total relevant profits earned by Google India relating to sale of Ad-words.

Splitting the residual profit between Google India and Step 4 Google Ireland
as the return for their respective non-

routine intangibles viz. marketing intangibles and technology intangibles
respectively.

Identifying the amount of revenue to be transferred by Step 5 Google India to
Google Ireland and vice versa 6.2.3 The following broad steps have been
followed for the purpose of arriving at an arm's length allocation as per
RPSM:

    
    
    
    6.2.3.1
                      Step 1     Identification of total cost for the different
                                 activities performed by Google India
    

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 262 of 331 For this purpose
total cost, inclusive of allocated overheads for the ITES and Sales and
Marketing activity performed by Google India hill be identified.

Google India has the following streams of revenue all of which relate to Ad-
words software-

 Sale of Adwords advertisement space and marketing of Adwords program.

 IT Enabled Service to Google India Google India's expenditure with respect
to Google Ireland can be categorized into following cost centers.

 Direct and Indirect costs relating to sale and marketing of Ad-words space.

 Direct and Indirect Costs relating to Information Technology Enabled
Services.

    
    
    
    
      6.2.3.2
    
                   Step 2          Assignment of a routine return for the
                                   contract IT Enabled Services performed by
                                   Google India for Google Ireland
    
    

The following table reflects the allocation of overhead to direct cost
centers-

    
    
                    Direct         Direct Cost         Allocated             Total
                     Cost                                Costs
                    Centre
                     ITES          1,193,264,930 1,237,386,661 2,430,651,096
                  Sales              582,661,083    50,023,615   632,684,698
                  Marketing
                  Service
                     Total         1,775,926,013 1,287,409,781 3,063,335,794
    

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 263 of 331 Note: Costs allocated
by the Assessee as per reply dated 3.12.2012 6.2.3.3 :

> Step 3 Ascertaining the residual profit by carving out the routine return
> profits from the total relevant profits earned by Google India relating to
> sale of Adwords.

> The calculation of residual return attributable to the non-routine
> intangibles is as below:
    
    
                                Particulars                            Amount
    
                 Total revenue earned by Google India in               2,433,217,266
                 connection with Ad-words during the
                 relevant period
    
                  Less: cost of sales and marketing service
                                                                         632,684,698
                 Total profit earned by Google India                   2,369,532,568
                 during the relevant period
    
    
                 Less return on contract ITES @ 25.04%
                 on cost Rs.2,430,651,096 (Para 7.0)                     608,635,034
    
                 Residual return for attributable to the
                 non-routine intangibles of technology                 1,760,897,534
                 and marketing relating to Adwords
    

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 264 of 331 6.2.3.4 Step 4
> Splitting the residual profit between Google India and Google Ireland as the
> return for their respective non-routine intangibles viz.

> marketing intangibles and technology intangibles respectively.

> The residual profit is split between the holder of non-routine technology
> intangibles (Google Ireland) and the holder of non-routine marketing
> intangibles (Google India) in an arm's length manner. For this reliance is
> placed on the economics of bargaining and game them. Set out in Appendix B;
> which suggests that splitting the residual profit in a 50:50 manner between
> Google India and Google Ireland would be most representative of an arm's
> length outcome in a bargaining situation.

> Accordingly following table provides the split of residual profit between
> Google India and Google Ireland-
    
    
                        Particulars          Percentage           Amount
    
                                             Attributable          (in Rupees)
                    Return Attributable to             50%       880,448,767
                   Non-routine Marketing
                  Return attributable
                  toNon- routine                       50%       880,448,767
                  Technology Intangible
    

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 265 of 331 6.2.3.5 Step 5
> Identifying the amount of revenue to be transferred by Google India to
> Google Ireland and vice versa The revenue attributable to Google India as
> the holder of Marketing intangible is determined considering the following-

 Google Ireland will pay Google India for the ITES Cost plus markup thereon.

 Google India will retain its share of residual profit due to its application
of marketing intangible in Adword business.

Accordingly in respect to international transactions entered into between
Google Ireland and Google India calculation is made as follows-

    
    
      PARTICULARS        Amount           Amount            Balance
                         Calculated by Calculated by receivable
                         TPO (in          the Assessee      by the
                         Rupees)          (in Rupees)       Assessee
      Cost incurred by 2,430,651,096 2,430,651,096                 00.00
      Google India on
      ITES
    
     Markup                 608,635,034        461,368,811 147,266,223
     calculated using
     TNMM on ITES
    
     Return                 880,448,767                00.00 880,448,767
     Attributable to
     Non-routine
     Marketing
     Intangible
    
     Less mark up on           00.00   102,627,056 102,627,056
     marketing service
     allowed by
     Google Ireland
           Total       3,919,734,897 3,084,646,963 835,087,934
    

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 266 of 331 6.2.3.6 Therefore,
Google India has computed the arm 's length price of international
transactions short by Rs.937,714,990. Adjustment in respect to international
transactions with Google Ireland therefore is proposed for Rs 937,714,990."

7.0 The Assessee Company has considered its markup in respect to ITES at arm's
length on the basis of comparison of its profit margin (operating
profit/operating cost) with the profit margin of uncontrolled comparables
computed using TNMM as the most appropriate method. TPO finds that the
identification of uncontrolled comparables' profit margin is not proper.
Therefore, the TPO rejects the ALP computed by the Assessee U/s 92 C (3) (c)
of the Income Tax Act 1961 and proceeds to compute the PLI of Uncontrolled
Comparables identified by me (TPO). The detailed discussion thereon is given
in annexure 'A' to this show cause. It is computed at 25.04 percent.
Accordingly, markup on ITES is computed by applying the mark up percentage of
25.04 percent on cost-base computed by the Assessee at Rs 2,430,651,096 8.0
theAssessee Company has also entered into international transaction of IT
Services. This international transaction has been entered by the Assessee with
Google Inc USA. TheAssessee has considered the markup of 21.25 % on cost base
of Rs 2,048,315,417 as at arm's length bycomparing the same with PLI of
Uncontrolled Comparables using TNMM as the most appropriate method.

8.1 In this connection on careful reading of TP Study it emerges that Google
India's STPI Units at Bangalore and Hyderabad act as R&D Centers wherein
certain Information Technology Services are performed. In Bangalore contracted
R&D services in the nature of Google 's Product development, product upgrades,
product support, testing of products and product improvement are performed. In
Bangalore Unit search results appearing on Google 'S website are reviewed; it
enables Google to improve the quality of search results for end users across
the world. (Please refer to search quality evaluation on page 11&12).
Hyderabad facility also performs certain software development task in
relations development of web-based language translator. Evaluation of Google
Services and tools for efficiency, bugs, performance, failure and other
aspects is also done in Bangalore. The Software is tested by the Hyderabad
unit of Google India before it is ready for release. (please refer to QA
Engineering on page 12). Therefore, TPO considers the IT services rendered by
Google India to Google Inc. USA are R&D services.

8.2 in this connection it is relevant to state that India's IT industry can be
divided into five main components, viz. Software Products, IT services,
Engineering and R&D services, ITES/BPO (IT- enabled services/Business Process
Outsourcing) and Hardware. Export revenues primarily on project based IT
Services continue to drive growth with IT Services accounting for 59% of total
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 267 of 331 revenues followed by
BPO and Engineering services at 22% and Software Products at 19%.

Increasing competition, pressure on billing rates and increasing
commoditization of lower- end ADM services are among the key reasons forcing
the Indian software industry to make afast move up the software value chain by
providing higher value-added services like consulting, product development,
R&D, mobile, cloud computing and end-to-end turnkey solutions. Thus R&D
ishigher value added service. It cannot be considered as low end service. It
is considered as comparable to companies which are engaged in Knowledge
Process Outsourcing Services. Therefore, the TPO considers that the data used
to determine the ALP of IT Services is incorrect and not reliable. Therefore,
it is rejected U/s 92 C (3)(c) of the Act and substituted by the study
conducted by the TPO of KPOs. Please see Annexure 'C' to this show cause.
Accordingly the Arm's Length Margin of the KPO 's 43.68 % per annexure is
applied to the cost base of the Assessee to determine the Arm.'s length price
of International Transactions, which the Assessee has entered into with Google
Inc USA.Accordingly, the Arms length price of the international transaction is
as follows-

    
    
         Particulars                 IT Services to      IT Services to
                                     Google Inc(as       Google(as per
                                     per TPO             Assessee)
         Cost Base (A)                   2,048,315,417           2,048,315,417
         Markup percentage                     43.63%                   21.25%
         Amount of Markup                  883,680,016
         (B)                                                        435,255,700
         Amount of Markup                2,931,995,433
         (A+B)                                                     2,483,571,117
    
    
    
    
    

8.3 Therefore, the difference between the ALP as per theTPO and the Assessee
Company computed at Rs 448,424,3'9 is proposed as an adjustment in respect to
this transaction.

9.0 in this case based on the discussion made above following amounts are
proposedfor adjustment-

    
    
        Amount ofAdjustment                               AMOUNT (in Rupees
    
        In respect to international transactions          835,087,934
        entered into by Google India with Google
        Ireland on aggregated basis
    
        In respect to IT Services to Google Inc           448,424,329
        USA
    
                             Total                        1,28,512,263
    

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 268 of 331 9.0 Calculation of
arms length price and adjustment has been done on the basis of transaction
details given in 3CEB Report and the TP Study filed by the Assessee Company.
But I find that in the Annual Report of the AssesseeCompany for FY 2008-09 in
Schedule K Domestic Advertising Revenues, net of fees Rs 751,364,443 for
distribution services, are shown at Rs 3,282,075,060. In other words, it may
be said that gross revenues, before the fees is paidforRs751,364,443, is Rs
4,033,439,503/. This is not the same figure which is given in TP Study and the
3CEB Report. Please certify the correct amount of Domestic Advertising
Revenue, failing which amount Rs 3,282,075,060 will be taken
intoconsideration."

In response to above show-cause notice, the assessee-company submitted a reply
on 28.01.2013 on three parts and the TPO's observations are as under : "3.3
Assessee in reply dated 28th January also reiterated in most part of it that
Assessee has performed all value added services, assumed significant risks and
used intangible assets in respect to all the international transactions and
Google India has only performed routine services for which it has been
suitably remunerated by Google India and Google Inc. I have already discussed
this aspect in detail in my both the show Cause reproduced in this order. I
have put up my stand on it. I have already discussed in the show cause that in
FAR analysis the contribution of Google India cannot be undermined by calling
it a routine service. Google India has in respect to all the international
transactions rendered more valuable services as well as contributed intangible
assets than Google Ireland and Google Inc. In a third part scenario the
payments which Google India deserve will be equal to what I have proposed in
the show- cause notice dated 18.01.2013. I continue to reiterate that the
Assessee has made efforts to show itself inferior by giving in the FAR
analysis the functions risks and the assets of Google India on one hand and
comparing it corresponding functions risks and the assets of any other group
entity belonging to Google group and therefore the analysis was between Google
India on one hand and Go ogle Group on the other and therefore, Google India
wasought to look inferior. However, in one to one comparison for FAR analysis
with that AE which entered into international transaction with Google India
then one will find that the contribution of Google India is far more superior
as compared to what Google India has been pained to be.

3.4 Assessee has submitted that Google India has entered into several
agreements with its AEs for rendering services and Google India has performed
those services as per the agreements andaccordingly remunerated also. Assessee
has therefore submits that agreements cannot be disregarded and due
consideration should be given to such commercial transactions.

I have taken the agreements into consideration. On the basis of services
performed by theAssessee as described in the TP Study, which is also the
document prepared by the Assessee and given to the TPO to understand the role
played by related parties in respect to each international transaction and
then decide the ALP of these transactions, I have concluded IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 269 of 331 that being a related party
transaction the Assessee is not being remunerated suitably and therefore, in
view of mandate conferred on the TPO by the Income Tax Act 1961 I have
proposed to reject the price determined by the Assessee and to substitute the
same with a price I have determined. Therefore, it cannot be described by the
Assessee as non-consideration of Agreements by the TPO.

3.5 The Assessee has once again in reply dated 28.01.2013 given details of
what the Assesseeand its AEs have done. In this connections it will be
relevant to state that the TPO has already made detailed study of functions
risks and assets of three enterprises given in the TP Study and subsequent
replies filed by the Assessee. I find that the Assessee has given vivid
description of everything Google Inc and Google Ireland have done. But in this
regards I have already discussed in the show cause that in respect to
international transactions at hand only we have to see as what is the
contribution of Google India, Google Ireland and Google Inc. Painting a
detailed picture of standalone entities is of not much avail. As against it I
have made relevant study in terms of FAR of Google India, Google Ireland and
Google Inc focusing on international transactions involved.

3.6 I have discussed at length the contribution of Google India in show case
notices and established that it will be wrong to call Google India a routine
service provider. Assessee is ready todeclare as wrong what it has been stated
in the TP study. TPO has on careful study mentioned in the show cause that
Delhi and Mumbai offices consist of direct sales team (approximately 250
people in totality) which approach corporate and mid-sized advertisers in
order to sell ad space for the Ad Words business. Assessee has submitted in
reply dated 28.01.2013 in para 34 that Assessee hasalready submitted in
foregoing paragraphs that size of the employees in Delhi and Mumbai office
consists of direct sales team of 25 employees (as against 250 employees which
is advertently mentioned in your self's notice. It shows that Assessee is not
ready to accept even those facts which have been furnished by the Assessee in
the TP Study. One can refer to page 13 of the TP study filed by the Assessee.
Assessee has very clearly given this fact that there are 250 employees in
Delhi and Mumbai sales team. Then why wrong statement by the Assessee in reply
dated 28.01.2013? I therefore continue to abide with each and every statement
I have made in two show reproduce above. Perhaps, Assessee is required to read
its own TP study carefully as TPO did. On careful study of FAR given by the
Assessee I found that ITeS and Sales and Marketing activities performed by
Google India cannot be viewed separately. They can be evaluated only on
aggregate basis. My conclusion is based on proper analysis of TP Study.
Assessee is finding its own submissions in TP Study as inconvenient and
therefore making wrong statement in an effort to declare that ITeS and Ad
Words Business are two independent streams and there is no confluence of them
at any point.That is why Assessee is supply new meaning to certain other terms
as Assessee has done in respect to 'non-exclusive' in para 37 of reply dated
28.01.2013.1 continue to hold that the Assessee has carried on the business of
Ad Words as full-fledged business enterprise and not on behalf of Google
Ireland. I have already made detailed discussion in the show-cause
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 270 of 331 on it and I donot
consider it necessary to repeat the same here.

3.7 The Assessee has raised certain objections on use of profit split method
also. One such objection is that ITes and AdWords are two separate
transactions. But I have already explained in the show- cause that they are
intermixed and one is incomplete without the other. They can only be evaluated
on an aggregate basis. Relevant portion of discussion in TP Study of the
Assesseeis reproduced below:

STPI Units at Hyderabad and Gurgaon also perform certain IT enabled services
which involve approving and administering of the advertisement. Hyderabad and
Gurgaon Units are involved in performing back office functions for the Adwords
Business such as approval of advertisements for the purpose of running the
same on the google website. On page 13it is mentioned that Google India has
entered into anagreement with Google Ireland Lid, Ireland for distribution
ofAdwordsProgram with its reasonable commercial expertise, own sales force and
customer service infrastructure. The Delhi and Mumbal offices consist of
direct sales teams (approximately 250 people in totality) which approach
corporate and midsized advertisers in order to sell apace for the Ad Words
business.

This is the conclusion of the TPO based on facts that ITeS and Ad Words are
intermixed and intertwined and the OECD guidelines are not averse to such
conclusion. The Assessee has also raised the objection that for profit split
global profit is an important prerequisite. In my view it is not necessary.
Only requirement for this purpose is total profit of contributing AEs and in
this case they are Google Ireland and Google India. That is why TPO has been
able to apply profit split method in this case. Assessee has not pointed out
any mistake in the same. And therefore, I do not consider it necessary to make
change in the method as well as the financial figures taken into
consideration.

3.8 Assessee is not ready to accept that there is any contribution of Google
India in Ad Word Business other than routine service. Assessee is not ready to
accept that Google India has contributed any marketing intangibles. Assessee
has also mentioned in para 53 that Finance Bill 2012 has clarified the term
intangible property used in the definition of International Transactions.
Assessee has reproduced Claue (ii) of Explanation to Section 92 B. I have
already explained in the show cause that Assessee has contributed intangible
assets of 'Customer base of Google India', 'Well trained marketing ream of
Google India', ' Promotion of Google brand name my performing the functions
efficiently' etc. If Assessee wants to know where Google India's contribution
in terms of intangible fits in, I would point out that it fits in human
capital related intangible assets such as trained and organized work force.
Employment agreements, union contracts. It also includes customer related
intangible assets such as customer list, customer contracts, customer
relationship, open purchase orders. It also includes Goodwill related
intangible assets such as institutional goodwill, professional practice
goodwill, personal goodwill of professional celebrity goodwill, general
business going concern value. What other IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 271 of 331 description Assessee requires for this
purpose. If technology is vital then equally vital is human skill. Why Google
Ireland requires trained man power in India if Technology is the only driver
for profit earning. The very fact Google India is incorporated and rendering
significant services is a proof that technology alone cannot run the business.
It needs both technology and human skill. One is incomplete without other.

3.9 Google India and Google Ireland are equal partners in earning profit from
AdWordBusiness and no one is entitled for profit more compared to other. 50:50
bargain theory is accepted worldwide it use to arrive at share in profit
cannot be ignored. I have used Profit split method asmost appropriate method,
which is one of the recognized method prescribed in Section 92 C (1) of the
Act 1961 and to arrive at ALP other methods used world over is permissible. In
this connection it is relevant to cite relevant paragraph form the landmark
decision of Hon. ITAT "C" Bench Chennai in the case of Ascendas (hdia) Private
Limited Vs Dy CIT Circle 1(1) Chennal (ITANo 1736/ Mds/ 201 1 AY 2007-08).

> "It thus appears that following one of the methods mentioned in (a) to (/)
> above are mandatory. However, in our opinion the purpose of enactment of
> chapter x, is to benchmark an international transaction with the Fair Market
> Value of such transaction, so as to ensure that there are no profit
> transfer- between parties in different jurisdiction effectually
> circumventing taxes. Thus, purpose of transfer pricing rules, is to verify
> whether the prices at which an international transactions has been carried
> out is comparable with the market value of the underlying asset or commodity
> or service. It may be true that difficulties might arise in ascertaining the
> fair market value but such difficulties should not be a reason for not
> adapting the rules and methods prescribed in t h i s regard. This might
> require some szihte adjustments in the m e t h o d o l og y prescribed for
> evaluation of an international transaction. A water t i g h t a t t i t u d
> e o f i n t e r p r e t a t i o n o f t h e pres cribed met h ods will
> defeat th e ver y p urpos e of enactment of transfer pricing rules and
> regulations and also detrimentally affect the effective and fair
> administration of an international tax regime. T h e i n t e r p r e t a t i
> o n o f t h e w o r d ' s h a l l ' n e e d n o t a l w a y s b e mandatory
> and could also be read as 'may', is a rule laid down by the on. Gujarat High
> Court in the case of CIT V Gujarat Oil & Allied Industires (201 JTR 325).
> This is more or less the same view taken by the Hon Apex C ourt in the cas e
> of Di r ector of Inspecti on of Income Tax (Investigation) V Pooran mal &
> Sons (96 ITR 390) and in the case of Sainik Motors VS State of Rajasthan
> (air 1961 SC 1480). Hence, while finding the most appropriate method it is
> not that n'aodernvaluation methods fitting the type of underlyingservice or
> commodities have to be ignored. Fixing enterprise value based on discounted
> value of future profits or cash is a method used worldwide. Endea vor is
> only to arri ve at a value whichwould give a comparable uncontrolled price
> for shares sold. If viewed from this angle, we cannot say that the
> discounted cash flow method adopted by the TPO was not in accordance with
> Sec 92 C (1).

3\. Thereforeallthe objections raised by the Assessee Company have been
attended to. There is nothing which TPO which may have a compelling force to
change the approach IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 272 of 331
adopted by the TPO and therefore, I proceed to take action in accordance to
the proposal contained in this regard in the show cause dated 18.01.2013. In
short it is to apply Residual profit split method taking ITeS and AdWord
related international transactions on aggregate basis.

4\. The Assessee has objected TPO's proposal to treat IT services it has
rendered to Google Inc as KPO and not- software development services. The
Assessee in Part C of the reply dated 28.01.2013 is on this aspect of the
second show-cause. Before making any more discussion on this aspect I consider
it necessary that at the expense of repetition I reproduce relevant paragraphs
from first show cause. Accordingly it is reproduced below-

2.1 In para 2.2.2 on page 11 of the Transfer Pricing Study Report for
Financial Year 2009-10 filed on 7.03.2012 (hereinafter referred to as the 'TP
Study) business activities of Google IndiaPrivate Limited (hereinafter
referred to as the Google India, or the assessee) have been described. It is
discussed in this para that Google India has three registered Units with STPI.
Google India's STN Units at Bangalore and Hyderabad act as R&D Centers wherein
certain InformationTechnology Services are performed. In Bangalore contracted
R&D services in the nature of Google's Product development, product upgrades,
product support, testing of products and product improvement are performed. In
Bangalore Unit search results appearing on Google 'swebsite are reviewed; it
enables Google to improve the quality of search results for end users across
the world. (Please refer to search quality evaluation on page 1 1&12).
Hyderabad development tasks in relation to development of web-based language
translator. Evaluation of Google Services and tools for efficiency bugs,
performance, facility also performs certain software failure and other aspects
is also done in Bangalore. The Software is tested by the HyderabAd unit of
Google India before it is ready for release. (please refer to QA Engineering
on page 12).

I find that Google India has performed IT services to GoolgeInc USA almost
every year. Position of IT services rendered by Google India to Google Inc USA
in this year and in two preceding years is as follows-

199\. In response to above show-cause notice, the assessee-company submitted a
reply on 28.01.2013 on three parts and the TPO's observations are as under :

200\. Finally the TPO vide order dt.29.01.2013 suggested TP adjustment of
Rs.128,35,12,263/- as under :

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 273 of 331 Amount of
> adjustment Amount (in Rupees) In respect to international transactions
> 835,087,934 entered into by Google India with Google Ireland on aggregated
> basis In respect to IT Services to Google Inc 448,424,329 USA Total
> 1,283,512,263

201\. The AO passed draft assessment order dt.04.03.2013 u/s.143(3) r.w.s.144C
of the Act incorporating the TP adjustments suggested by the TPO of
Rs.128,35,12,263/- and reducing the telecommunication charges incurred in
respect of software segment of the business of Rs.10,99,83,459/- only from the
export turnover without reducing the same from the total turnover, thereby
restricting the deduction u/s.10A to Rs.181,61,83,592/-. Further the AO also
disallowed a sum of Rs.328,20,75,060/- invoking the provisions of Section
40(a)(ia) of the Act, on the ground that the assessee- company had failed to
deduct tax on the amount of distribution fees on AdWords distribution
programme payable to Google Ireland. Further the TPO also made addition on
account of additional profits attributable to AdWords programme of
Rs.117,37,50,871/-.

202\. After receipt of the draft assessment order, the assessee-company had
filed objections before the Hon'ble DRP contending that the TPO is not
justified in rejecting TP study submitted by the assessee-company and re-
characterising the company as high- end KPO-company and also aggregating the
activities of distribution of AdWords and ITeS segment. The assessee-company
also objected for the use of single year's data and contested the selection of
comparables by the TPO on the ground that the comparables IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 274 of 331 are functionally different. The
assessee-company also objected restriction of disallowance u/s 10A. The
assessee-company also objected to restriction of 10A deduction and addition
u/s 40(a)(i) of the Act.

203\. Hon'ble DRP, after considering the submissions made on behalf of the
assessee- company upheld the characterisation of IT services as high-end KPO
services. However, directed the TPO to exclude M/s Coral Hub (formerly known
as M/s Vishal Technologies), as comparable in respect of IT segment. However,
Hon'ble DRP held that the activities of ITeS and AdWords distribution
programme segment should be benchmarked separately. However, upheld
appropriateness of various filters applied by the TPO in the selection of
comparables in ITeS segment and also upheld the comparables selected by the
TPO.

204\. AdWords Segment:

Hon'ble DRP held that profit split method should be adopted as most
appropriate method. However, for the purpose of arriving at over-all profits
earned by the group, expenses incurred by Google Ireland should be factored.
Hon'ble DRP granted relief in respect of 10A deduction by directing the AO to
reduce telecommunication expenses incurred in foreign currency both from
export turnover as well as total turnover.

205\. In respect of disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act, Hon'ble DRP
directed AO/TPO to restrict disallowance by reducing the amount of TP
adjustment. Hon'ble DRP also granted relief in respect of addition made on
account of accretion of additional income to AdWords programme by holding that
the transactions in relation to distribution of AdWord programme is also bench
marked.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 275 of 331

206\. After receipt of the Hon'ble DRP's order, final assessment order was
passed vide order dated 31/01/2014 u/s 143(3) r.w.s. 144C of the Act. After
giving effect to the directions of the Hon'ble DRP, the TP adjustment was
reduced to Rs.82,51,71,946/- and the disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia) was reduced to
Rs.1,41,80,57,831/-.

207\. Being aggrieved, the assessee-company is in appeal in IT(TP)A
No.69/Bang/2014 against that part of the order of the assessment order which
is against it and the revenue is in appeal in IT(TP)A No.191/Bang/2014 against
that part of the order of the assessment order which is against the revenue.

208\. Now, we shall take up the appeal filed by the assessee-company. The
assessee raised the following grounds of appeal:

"Based on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld AO/Ld TPO and
the Hon'ble DRP have:

A. Transfer Pricing Issues Erred in rejecting the transfer pricing
documentation maintained by the Appellant and making adjustments in respect of
the following international transactions with its AEs:

>  Provision of software services- Rs. 41,02,20,628;

>  Provision of Information Technology enables Services (ITeS)- Rs.
> 14,72,66,223; and  Purchase of advertisement space for distribution to the
> advertisers in India Rs. 26,76,85,095.

2\. Erred in using single year data of companies to determine the arm's length
price of the international transactions without considering the fact that the
same was not available to the Appellant at the time of complying with the
transfer pricing documentation requirements and disregarding the Appellant's
claim for use of multiple year data for computing the arm's length price.

3\. Erred in selecting certain companies which are earning super normal
profits ascomparable to the Appellant in determining the ALP for the services.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 276 of 331

4\. Erred in considering provision for bad debts as non-operating cost in
computing the net margins under Transactional Net Margin Method

5\. Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant operates as a risk
mitigated service provider and all the key risks associated with the functions
performed are borne by the Associated Enterprise (AE) and not by the
Appellant.

6\. Erred in not adjusting the net margins of the comparable companies
selected taking into account the functional and risk differences between the
international transaction of the Appellant and the comparable transactions in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 10B(1)(e) of the Income-tax Rules,
1962.

7\. Erred in not making adjustment for the difference in working capital of
the Appellantvis- à-vis the comparables selected.

8\. (a) Erred in not allowing the option under the proviso to section 920(2)
of the Act in limiting the adjustment at a variation of 5 percent to the arm's
length price.

(b) Erred in not appreciating the fact that the amendment to section 92C(2) of
the Act is not applicable for the relevant AY under consideration.

Grounds specific to TP adjustments to provision of software services

9\. Erred in rejecting the FAR analysis and re-characterizing the activities
performed by the Appellant as Knowledge Process Outsourcing (`KPO') services
instead of software services.

10\. Erred in adopting an approach different from its predecessors in
assessment yearsup to assessment year 2008-09, without any change in facts or
circumstances of the case from earlier years.

11\. Erred in not undertaking an objective search and selecting of the
follovving companiesas comparables on an ad-hoc basis:

a) Acropetal Technologies;

b) Eclerx Services Ltd; and

c) Genesys International Corporation.

Grounds specific to TP adjustments to provision of ITES

12\. Erred in rejecting the contemporaneous data (i.e., data existing before
the due dateof filing of return of income) and in undertaking a fresh
comparable search during the course of assessment proceedings, using
information/data which was not available to the Appellant at the time of
satisfying the mandatory documentation requirements.

13\. Erred in inter-alia using of the following additional filters in
undertaking thecomparative analysis for rejecting comparable companies having:

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 277 of 331

> a) Diminishing revenue; and

> b) Different year end.

14\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
selectingthe following companies as comparable to the ITES services of the
Appellant:

    
    
              a)      Accentia Technologies Ltd;
              b)      Eclerx Services Ltd;
              c)      Infosys BPO Ltd; and
              d)      Informed Technologies India Ltd.
    
    

15\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
rejecting thefollowing comparable companies:

    
    
              e)      Lee & Nee Software Ltd; and
              f)      Microland Ltd (Call Centre segment).
    

Grounds specific to TP adjustments relating to payment for purchase of
advertisement space under the AdWords program.

16\. Erred in not undertaking an objective Functions Assets and Risks ('FAR')
analysisand concluding that the Appellant owns marketing intangibles.

17\. Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant performs a limited
role in theprovision of web based advertisement and that the AEs undertake all
the economically significant functions.

18\. Erred in adopting an approach different from its predecessors in
assessment yearsup to assessment year 2008-09 in selection of most appropriate
method, without any change in facts or circumstances of the case from earlier
year.

19\. Erred in rejecting Transaction Net Margin Method ('TNMM') and determining
the ALP by applying Profit Split Method ('PSM') as the most appropriate
method.

20\. Erred in not applying PSM in accordance with the provisions of Rule 10B
of theIncome Tax Rules, 1962 and following an erroneous methodology.

21\. Erred in applying PSM, not determining the correct contribution made by
the AE inearning the revenue in accordance with the FAR analysis of the
transactions.

22\. Erred in not providing requisite adjustment for the contribution made by
the AE in theform of credit granted for the amount payable by the Appellant to
the AE towards purchase of the advertisement space.

23\. Erred in not following a consistent approach in considering the nature of
provision for IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 278 of 331
bad debts in determination of the ALP B. Corporate Tax Issues Rejection of
Books of accounts

24\. Erred in holding that the duly audited books of account of the Appellant
are incomplete and incorrect based on conjectures and surmises without
appreciating the complete disclosures made in the books of accounts maintained
by the Appellant.

Disallowance of payments made to Google Ireland Limited invoking provisions of
section 40(a)(ia) of the Act

25\. Erred in holding that the amounts payable by the Appellant to Google
Ireland Limitedfor purchase of advertisement space under the AdWords Program
were chargeable to tax in India.

26\. Erred in holding that the Appellant, in relation to distribution of
advertisement space under the AdWords program, create a Dependent Agent
Permanent Establishment of Google Ireland Ltd under Article 5 of the India-
Ireland Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement and the receipts are taxable as
business profits in India.

27\. Having held that the Appellant was an agent of Google Ireland Ltd. erred
in holding that Appellant 'was a person responsible for paying' any amount to
Google Ireland Ltd. within the meaning of section 195 of the Act and that the
Appellant gas failed to deduct tax at source on the amounts payable to Google
Ireland Limited.

28\. Having held that the Appellant creates a Dependent Agent Permanent
Establishment of Google Ireland Limited in India, erred in attributing
business profits, ignoring the fact that the Ld TPO has determined the arm's
length remuneration for the Appellant and- hence there was no additional
income chargeable to tax in India in the hands of Google Ireland Ltd requiring
any deduction of tax at source under Section 195 of the Act and hence no
disallowance under section 40(a)(i) of the Act is warranted.

29\. Having held that the Appellant was an agent of Google Ireland Ltd. erred
in holding that Appellant 'was a person responsible for paying' any amount to
Google Ireland Ltd. within the meaning of section 195 of the Act.

30\. Erred in alternatively holding the amount payable towards purchase of
advertisement space under the Agreement as either Royalties or Fees for
Technical Services under Article 12 of the India-Ireland Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement.

31\. Erred in upholding that the Appellant was required to deduct tax at
source from the amount payable by the Appellant to Google Ireland and in view
of its failure to deduct tax, the amount of Rs 1,41,80,57,831 was required to
be disallowed u/s 40(a)(i) of the Act.

32\. Without prejudice to the above, assuming without admitting that the
amount paid/ payable by the Company to Google Ireland Limited is not
chargeable to tax in India IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 279 of 331 warranting any deduction u/s 195 of the Act, the Ld AO have
erred in disallowing the amount paid/ payable to Google Ireland Limited u/s
40(a)(i) disregarding the fact that the demand raised by the Learned Deputy
Director of Income-tax (International Taxation), Circle 1(1), Bangalore u/s
201(1) of the Act for the relevant AY has been remitted by the Appellant.

C. Miscellaneous

33\. Have erred in imposing the levy of interest u/s 234B of the Act.

34\. Have erred in initiating the penalty proceedings initiated u/s 271(1)(c)
of the Act.

The Appellant craves, to consider each of the above grounds of appeal
independently without prejudice to one another and craves leave to add, alter,
delete or modify all or any of the above grounds of appeal."

209\. Ground Nos.1 to 8 are general in nature relating to TP adjustment and
were not pressed during the course of hearing, hence dismissed as such.

210\. Ground No.9 challenges FAR analysis and functions of the assessee-
company undertaken by the TPO and re-characterising activities of the
assessee-company as only Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) instead of ITeS.
It is submitted that the assessee-company had entered into service agreement
with Google Ireland on 01.01.2006 whereby the assessee-company had agreed to
provide IT services to Google Inc. USA. Copy of the agreement is placed at
pages 1 to 14 of the paper book.

211\. It is submitted that the units at Bangalore and Hyderabad act as R&D
centre for Google Ireland from where certain IT services are provided. It was
further submitted that this service involved evaluation of Google services and
tools for efficiency, bugs, performance, failure and other aspects. The
software is tested by the Hyderabad unit of GIPL before it is ready for
release. The results of evaluation are reported to the development team abroad
in the form of reports, mails, oral/non documented forms and IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 280 of 331 other modes of technical
communication. In consideration for the said services, assessee- company is
compensated on a cost plus 17.50% mark-up basis.

212\. With regard to the above international transaction, the assessee-company
has carried out detailed functional analysis covering functions performed,
assets utilized and the risks assumed by assessee-company and its AE i.e.
Google Inc. and the same has been submitted to the TPO as part of TP
documentation.

213\. Based on the FAR analysis, TNMM was selected as the most appropriate
method for the international transaction relating to rendering of IT services.
The economic analysis was conducted by the assessee-company to identify
external comparable companies engaged in similar services. Based on the
comparability analysis, a set of 16 comparable companies was identified. The
three year's average OP/TC of the comparable companies was computed at 16.46%
as compared to OP/TC of 21.25% earned by the assessee-company. Hence, the
assessee-company concluded that the international transaction in IT services
segment was at arm's length.

214\. The TPO had rejected the FAR analysis conducted by the assessee-company
in the TP study and re-characterised the activities/functions and performance
of the assessee-company as KPO service instead of IT services. The TPO
observed that Bengaluru and Hyderabad STP units of the assessee-company act as
R&D centres, which are in the nature of product development, product upgrades,
product support, testing of products and product improvement. This approach of
the TPO was confirmed by the Hon'ble DRP.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 281 of 331

215\. Now before us, it is contended that the assessee-company provides IT
services which involve evaluation of Google products and tools for efficiency,
bugs, performance, failures and other aspects, software development tasks in
relation to development of web based language translator, etc. The TPO failed
to understand that the assessee-company performs IT services in the role of a
contract developer wherein the assessee-company is not exposed to any market
risk or commercial risk for the product and accordingly, remunerated as
assured return on a cost plus mark-up basis.

216\. It was further submitted that the functions of KPO fall under category
of ITeS. It is further submitted that the modules worked upon by the assessee-
company form very insignificant part of Google products and major significant
functions are done by Google Ireland, USA for development of end product and
there was no-end product developed in India and Google patent search engine
was developed much before setting up of the assessee-company in India. It was
further submitted that in the earlier years i.e. assessment years 2005-06 to
2008-09, these activities have been characterised by the Tribunal as IT
services and the same was confirmed by this Tribunal and there was no change
in the functional profile of the assessee-company during the previous year
relevant to assessment year under consideration from earlier assessment year.
Thus it was contended that the TPO was not justified in re-characterising the
functions of the assessee-company as KPO services. Further, learned AR of the
assessee-company also drawn our attention to the definition of the term 'KPO'
and 'software development' as defined under rule 10T(a)(g) of the Safe Harbour
Rules.

217\. On the issue of selection of comparable by the TPO, it was submitted
that the company M/s.Acropetal Ltd. cannot be compared with that of the
assessee-company as it is into the health-care software and allied products
and services and also into IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 282 of 331 development of products. The company has got very high
intangibles and no segmental information is available. Therefore, this company
cannot be compared with that of the assessee-company.

218\. As regards M/s.Coral Hub Ltd., it is submitted that this company is into
services like sale of books, preparation of financial statement, liquidity
monitoring etc., which cannot be compared with that of the assessee-company
and it was also submitted that this company outsources segmental portion of
its work to outside people. Therefore, this company cannot be compared with
that of the assessee-company.

219\. Similarly, as regards M/s.Eclerx Services Ltd. this company was into
business of consultancy and advisory services and provide analytic services
and no segmental information is available. This company also cannot be
compared. Therefore, this company cannot be compared with that of the
assessee-company.

220\. Regarding ITeS Services, learned AR of the assessee-company submitted
that the services rendered in terms of agreement entered into by the assessee-
company with Google Ireland on 01.04.2004 and in consideration of such
services, the assessee- company was remunerated at cost + mark up of 15.5%.
The nature of ITeS was submitted as under:

> Information Technology Services and Information Technology Enabled Services:

Google India has registered 3 units (Bangalore, Hyderabad and Gurgaon) with
the Software Technology Parks of India ('STPI') and from these units, the
company provides Information Technology services and IT enabled services.
Google India has entered into agreements with Google Ireland Limited and
Google Inc to provide IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 283 of 331 IT and ITeS services.

Google India's STPI units at Bangalore and Hyderabad act as R&D centers for
Google group wherein certain Information Technology services are performed.
The Bangalore facility started with low-level routine software development
tasks related to various Google products like Google Maps, Google Earth,
Scheduler, which extended tçnxiaçd R&D services in the nature of Google's
product development, product upgrades, product support, testing of products
and product improvements. The services are:

Search quality evaluation :

This service involves the review of search results appearing on Google's
website, which enables Google to make decisions that are designed to improve
the quality of search results for end users across the world.

QA engineering This service involves the evaluation of Google services and
tools for efficiency, bugs, performance, failure and other aspects. The
software is tested by the Hyderabad unit of Google India before it is ready
for release. The results of evaluation are reported to the development team
abroad in the form of reports, mails, oral/non-documented forms and other
modes of technical communication.

The STPI units at Hyderabad and Gurgaon also perform certain IT enabled
services, primarily relate to performance of all such activities which involve
approving and administering of the Advertisements in line with certain
editorial and other relevant guidelines.

These units are involved in performing back office functions for the AdWords
business, as described below:

Approvals for advertisements for the purpose of running the same on the Google
website These services mainly involve IT-enabled data processing work. The
data comes from the customer and is routed to the Hyderabad unit through a
workflow based on language and tier. On receiving the data, the AdWords team
reviews the advertisement according to company policy. The resulting
advertisement approval means that a customer's advertisement can now be viewed
on the web sites IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 284 of 331
of Google and or its partners located outside India.

Further, the Hyderabad facility also performs certain software development
tasks in relation to development of a web-based language translator. This is a
project that is spearheaded by Google US and Google Ireland. Google India
performs the role of a contract developer. All risks relating to software
development are borne by the AEs and rights in the software also vest with the
AEs.

Distributor for AdWords Program:

Google India has entered into an agreement on 12 December 2005 with Google
Ireland Ltd., Ireland for distribution of Ad Words Program. As per the
agreement, Google India has to market and distribute AdWords Program to
advertisers in the designated Territory, within the broad guidelines provided
by Google Ireland, with its reasonable commercial expertise and own sales
force and customer service infrastructure.

The Delhi and Mumbai offices consist of direct sales teams (approximately 250
people in totality) which approach corporate and mid-sized advertisers in
order to sell ad space for the AdWords business.

Online Sales :

The Hyderabad unit has an online sales and marketing team, which functions as
a customer service support center and helpdesk for the AdWords business.

221\. It was further submitted that the assessee-company had three units at
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Gurgoan, which are registered as STP units. These
units perform ITeS Services which involve approving and administering
advertisements in conformity with certain editorial and other relevant
guidelines. The assessee-company also submitted the TP study with FAR analysis
of functions performed by the assessee-company and TNMM was selected as the
most appropriate method for the purpose of bench marking ITeS functions. A set
of 8 comparables were identified using comparable company's three previous
year's data. The operating profit of the comparable selected was
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 285 of 331 computed at 18.89% as
against operating profit of the assessee-company at 10.24%. Hence, it was
claimed that the transactions of the assessee-company with its AE in respect
of ITeS are at arm's length. The TP study was rejected by the TP on the
following grounds:

    
    
                  does not satisfy all filters applied by the TPO.
                  has declining sales for the last three years.
                  has year ending other than March.
                  service income to sales is 44.04%
                  functions of the company are not clear and no segmental information
                  Financial year data is not available.
    
    
    

222\. The TPO proceeded to carry out a fresh search using the current year's
data and finally selected the following eight comparables :

> i. Infosys BPO Ltd.

> ii. Aditya Birla Minac Worldwide Ltd.
    
    
           iii.   MicrolandLdt (both segments)
           iv.    AllsecTechnogies Ltd.
            v.    Accentia Technologies Ltd.
           vi.    Informed Technologies Ltd.
          vii.    Cosmis Global Ltd.\
         viii.    Eclerx Services Ltd
    
    

> 223\. The average profit of the above comparables was computed at 25.04% and
> ALP adjustment was suggested at Rs.14,72,56,223/- Based on the above, the
> TPO suggested an upward adjustment in respect of ITES segment. Hon'ble DRP
> also confirmed the approach applied by the TPO.

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 286 of 331

224\. Before us it is contended that the details of activities carried out by
the assessee- company in ITES segment are as under:

    
    
     Section                                      Particulars                                  Page No
         I     ITES activities carried out by Google India
               A)   Background                                                                     1
               B)   Details of ITES activities provided by Google India
                    1) Details of Global outsoured Ad revies services                            2-4
                    2) Details of Global outsourced Advertisers Help Desk                        4-6
                    3) Details of Global outsourced Advertisers support                          6-7
    
    
        II          Difference between Distribution agreement and ITES ageement
               A)   Details of Distribution agreeement entered into by Google India              7-8
                    with GIL and activities performed by Google India
               B)
    

Summary of activities performed in India and outside India with respect to
advertising service provided via the Goa 8 - 10 AdWords Program to advertisers
in India C) Details of how Distribution agreeement and ITES agreement are
completely independent of each other 11 - 12 III EXHIBITS Exhibit "1" sample
invoices raised by Google India on GIL for exert of ITES services 13 - 26
Exhibit "2" Global outsourced Ad review services chart 27 Exhibit "3" Global
outsourced Advertisers Help Chart 28 Exhibit "4" Global outsourced Advertiser
support chart 29 Exhibit "5" sworn statement of ITES head of Global India
explaining 30-35 details of ITES activities carried out by Google India
Exhibit "6" Financial statements of Google India for the year 36 - 48 ended
31st March 2005 Exhibit "7" Affidavit of Mr. Hari Raju, Director of Appellant
49 - 58 Company i.e. Google India Private Ltd.

225\. On the selection of comparables, it is contended that the comparable
entity M/s.EclerxServices Ltd, was selected for both IT and ITES segment by
the TPO. It is IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 287 of 331
further submitted that the comparables selected by the TPO needs to be
excluded on functional differences.

226\. It is submitted that the company, M/s.EclerxServices Ltd, is high end
diversified ITES service provider, providing data analytics and data process
solutions to some of the largest brands in the world and therefore, the
company is functionally different.

227\. It is submitted that M/s.Accentia Technologies Ltd is also functionally
different as it is engaged into Healthcare Receivables Cycle Management (HRCM)
services and Software Products for Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). Further
segmental data is not available. This company earns revenues from medical
transcription, billing and collection and income from coding. Therefore, this
company is functionally different.

228\. It is submitted that M/s.Infysos BPO Ltd. is also functionally different
as it provides diversified BPO services and it possesses high brand value and
intangibles and extra-ordinary activities.

229\. It was also submitted that the company M/s.Lee& Nee Software Ltd.,
requires to be included in the list of comparables as it is functionally
comparable since it is into ITES services.

230\. It was also submitted that in respect of comparable company
M/s.Microland Ltd., only ITeS Segment should be considered for ALP computation
and IT infrastructure should be excluded for margin computation.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 288 of 331

231\. As regards ground Nos.16 to 23 raised by the assessee-company, it
challenges the residual profit split method applied by the TPO by rejecting
the TNMM selected by the assessee company. It was further contended that even
the profit split method was not applied in accordance with the provisions of
10-B(1)(d) of the IT Rules 1962, as the TPO had failed to apply the correct
contribution made by the AE in earning the revenue, in accordance with the FAR
analysis of the transaction.

232\. It is submitted that the whole basis applying residual profit split
method is the allegation that the assessee-company has human intangibles and
customer-base. While making such allegation, the lower authorities had
completely ignored the fact that the technology plays a vital role and a
value-driver and the technology is owned by Google Inc and licensed to Google
Ireland Ltd. Learned AR further submitted that without prejudice to the
argument that the assessee-company had not created any marketing intangibles,
it is argued that marketing intangibles are not relevant or material in the
business of AdWords distribution. It was further contended that, the mandatory
conditions for application of profit split method, are not satisfied in the
present case as there is no transfer of unique intangibles is involved, and
multiple international transactions which are so inter-related that they
cannot be evaluated separately for the purpose of determining the ALP of any
one transaction.

233\. On the other hand the learned CIT(DR) argued on IT services that from
the TP study submitted by the assessee-company, the TPO observed that the two
STPI units at Bengaluru and Hyderabad operate as R & D Centres rendering R & D
services in the domain of Google product development, project updates, testing
of products and product improvement. From the very description of these
services, it is clear that these services IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 289 of 331 contribute high value addition to the
products of the assessee-company i.e., M/s.Google India Ltd. Therefore, the
TPO was justified in characterising these activities as KPO services. It was
further submitted that the assessee company had submitted the 'note' on the
nature of activities carried out by the assessee-company in IT segment under
the search quality evaluation and QA engineering. It is further pointed out
that search quality evaluation involves review of search results appearing on
Google website and based on that review, Google Inc, the assessee company
ultimately takes the decision to improve the quality of search results. This
review work cannot, by itself, be termed as software development services. It
is more of an activity of data analytics which fall within the category of KPO
services. As regards the activities under the category of QA engineering, the
learned CIT(DR) submitted that it involves evaluation of Google tools for
efficient bug removal, performance, evaluation and other aspects. The
evaluation results are reported to development wing abroad in the form of
reports, e-mails etc.

234\. It was further submitted that these services and tools cannot be
described as software development services and it is argued that the services
performed under the IT segment are purely in the nature of KPO services and
therefore the TPO was justified in characterising as a KPO services company.
As regards the characterisation done in the earlier years, it was submitted
that, in the earlier assessment years, there was no detailed discussion by the
TPOs in respect of the nature of services rendered by the assessee- company in
this segment. Therefore, in the absence of these discussions one cannot come
to a conclusion on the characterisation of the functions undertaken by the
assessee- company and the principle of res-judicata has no application to the
facts of the case as each year is separate and distinct.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 290 of 331

235\. ITeS :

The learned CIT(DR) submitted that the services rendered in ITeS were
concerned with AdWords Distribution Programme and therefore the activities of
ITeS services and AdWords Distribution Programme are inter-linked, inter-
related and in-separable. Therefore, it was argued that the Hon'ble DRP was
not justified in directing the AO/TPO to bench mark the activities under the
ITeS segment and AdWords Distribution Programme. It was further submitted that
there was inconsistency in the approach of Hon'ble DRP while directing the TPO
to aggregate the international transactions relating to the distribution of
AdWords programme and ITeS. However, the Hon'ble DRP took a contrary stand by
holding that ITeS and AdWords segment are to be bench marked separately. In
this connection, learned CIT(DR) had invited our attention to clauses 2.3,
2.5, 2.6 and 3.4 of the Agreement entered into by the assessee-company with
Google Ireland in respect of AdWords Distribution Programme, dt.12.12.2005 to
demonstrate that the activities of ITES are closely inter-linked with the
activity of AdWords Distribution Programme. It is submitted that the assessee-
company set up STP units at Gurgaon and Hyderabad which involved services like
administration, advertisement and other back-office functions such as after
sales support for AdWords business. The ITeS performed at STPI units at
Bengaluru and Hyderabad added value addition to Google Inc. Through its
operations the assessee company had contributed intangible assets of customer
base, marketing team to Google Inc and Google Ireland. Google Ireland has only
contributed to AdWords business is not correct. It has generated intangibles
i.e., AdWords programme, which was in fact, not owned by it, but was only a
sub-licensee. Based on this analysis of functions performed by the assessee-
company the TPO had arrived at the conclusion that the assessee-company was
not compensated adequately for its contribution to marketing intangibles.
Whereas the AE i.e., Google Ireland was paid IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014,
2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205,
1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A
No.387/Bang/2017  Page 291 of 331 distribution fee of more than what would
have otherwise been paid in the uncontrolled situation. Thus it was submitted
that the TPO was justified in adopting residual profit split method, wherein
the profits from the routine activities like ITeS was reduced from the net
revenue earned by the assessee-company on AdWords Distribution Programme and
thereafter divide the profit between the assessee company and Google Ireland
in the ratio of 50 : 50.

236\. It was further submitted by the learned CIT(DR) that the Hon'ble DRP
also has confirmed this method. However, the Hon'ble DRP directed the TPO to
apply the profit split method of residual profit split method. He argued that
having regard to the FAR analysis all the functions performed by the assessee,
it is clear that the assessee company also contributed towards the
advertisement of marketing intangibles which, in turn, contributed to the
development of AdWords business profits and the methodology adopted to
compensate the assessee company on cost-plus basis, is not proper. In such
circumstances, profit split method is the most appropriate method for
determining the ALP of the distribution fees. He further submitted that the
profit split method is one of the recognised methods for determination of ALP
where the assessee generates revenue out of the operations that are highly
integrated and where there is a transfer of technology intangibles. Reliance
was also placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of
Global One India P. Ltd v. ACIT (44 taxmann.com 100). He also disputed the
submission made by the Ld. AR that only twenty persons were employed for
marketing the AdWords Distribution Programme.

237\. We heard rival submissions and perused material on record. As regards TP
adjustment, the TPO had rejected the TP study report submitted by the
assessee- company on the ground that there was no separate FAR analysis of
each function IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 292 of 331
performed with AEs. The TP study contains FAR analysis of the functions
performed. Needless to say the TP analysis should be ideally made on a
transaction by transaction basis except in cases where transactions are so
closely inter-related or continuous that application of arm's length principle
on a transaction by transaction basis would be unreliable or cumbersome. Only
in those cases the transactions are aggregated. Therefore, the TPO was
justified in rejecting the TP study submitted by the assessee- company.
However, from perusal of TPO order it is clear that the TPO made TP analysis
without referring to any evidence or actual conduct of the parties. Thus, in
our considered opinion neither the assessee-company nor the TPO had approached
the issue in proper perspective and therefore in the absence of proper TP
analysis in proper perspective, the comparability of international transaction
cannot be judged. Therefore, in fitness of things, we remand the entire TP
issues to the file of the TPO/AO for undertaking the exercise of TP analysis
afresh after affording opportunity to the assessee-company to furnish TP study
report covering the entire functions performed, assets employed and risks
undertaken transaction-wise in respect of international transaction with AE.

238\. After the TP analysis on the above lines, the TPO shall aggregate the
functions which has a direct nexus with core business activity i.e. AdWords
distribution programme. We had already held in the appeal against order passed
u/s 201(1) that the activities under ITeS services are integral part of
AdWords distribution programme. Further the TPO shall examine whether the
functions of the assessee-company resulted in creation of intangibles i.e.
marketing intangibles or technological intangibles. Whether these intangibles
so created are owned and used by the assessee-company itself or transferred to
any other entity and whether the assessee-company is properly compensated for
transferring such intangibles. The findings of the TPO shall be based
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 293 of 331 on the actual conduct
of the parties and evidence produced by the assessee-company. The
characterisation of functions cannot be based on not merely terms of contract
or description of the services given by the assessee-company. It has to be
determined having regard to the actual conduct of the parties. It is pertinent
to state that the AO/TPO shall have regard to the guidelines issued by the
CBDT vide circular No.6 of 2013 dated 29th June 2013 in deciding the
functional profile of the assessee-company. In respect of transactions
independent of AdWords distribution programme, the characterisation of the
functions performed shall be based on the actual conduct of the parties and
actual activities performed. The comparability of all these independent
transactions shall be judged with reference to uncontrolled similar
transaction by adopting most appropriate method and comparability factors. In
respect of transactions aggregated with AdWords business transaction, the TPO
shall bench-mark the transaction by adopting Profit Split Method as most
appropriate method, as the transaction of business of AdWords programme
requires deployment of assets and functions of different entities located in
different geographical locations in order to ultimately deliver services as
the combined effort generate revenues. It is also settled proposition of law
that Profit Slip Method (PSM) can be adopted as most appropriate method in
cases involving multiple inter- related international transactions which
cannot be evaluated separately. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the
decision of the co-ordinate bench in the case of Orange Business Services
India Networks (P) Ltd. Vs. Dy.CIT (2015) 63 taxmann.com 304 (Delhi-Trib),
Global One India (P.) Ltd. Vs. Asst. CIT (2014) 44 taxmann.com 100(Delhi-
Trib). Thus, all the grounds of appeal relating to TP adjustment are set aside
to the file of the AO/TPO for de novo assessment after affording due
opportunity of being heard. These grounds of appeal are partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 294 of 331

239\. We consider it not necessary to deal with the selection of comparables,
as we restored to the file of the AO/TPO to decide the issue of
characterisation of the functional profile of the assessee-company in
respective segments.

240\. In ground No.24, the assessee-company challenges rejection of book
results. The AO had noticed that the assessee-company had not credited the
gross receipts on account of AdWords business to its P & L account, but
credited only the share of advertisement revenue. Considering this, show-cause
notice dt.01.01.2013, was issued to the assessee- company, calling upon to
explain why all the receipts from AdWords business were not accounted on gross
basis in the P & L account filed and also explain as to why the P & L account
should not be recast in accordance with the Accounting Standards and further
explain as to why the books should not be rejected as it has failed to follow
the standard accounting practices.

241\. The assessee-company filed explanation to the show- cause notice, vide
letter dt.15.02.2013, stating that its books of account were duly audited by
the chartered accountants who had opined that the books of account have been
prepared in conformity with the standard auditing practices and the income has
been disclosed on net basis and the assessee-company has offered entire income
from distribution service to tax. Therefore, it was contended that there was
no need for recasting the P & L account or re-working the profits of the
company. It was further contended that there was no need for rejecting the
books u/s.145, as the conditions for invoking section 145 were not satisfied
in the present case. It was further contended that the books of account are
correct and complete and the correct method of accounting has been followed by
the assessee. The assessee-company had complied with the accounting standards
notified by the Central Government and the same method of account has been
regularly followed IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 295 of 331
from year to year. However, the AO rejecting the above contentions, held that
the books are liable for rejection, vide para.17 of the assessment order which
reads as under and recast the P & L account :

> "17. The submissions made by the assessee company are considered. It is seen
> that as per this contract dated 12-12-2005 with M/s. Google Ireland Ltd, the
> assessee company was required to conduct the Adwords marketing on its own
> account and as an independent distributor of the said programme. The
> contract mentions in as many words that the Adwordsprogramme is sold by the
> assessee for its own account, in its own name, and not as an agent,
> employee, partner or franchisee of Google". The various other clauses of the
> said agreement also make if clear that the assessee company was required to
> run the businesses on its own account. Moreover the assessee company was
> expected to pay "fees for distribution right' to M/s. Google and all this
> fees and payments were made subject to DTAA and Indian Tax Laws, The
> assessee is an Indian company incorporated under the Companies Act with the
> Registrar of companies. The Indian companies Act makes the accounting
> standards given by Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICA)
> mandatory for all the Indian companies. The revenue generated from the said
> activity must be declared in its entirety on a gross basis as per the
> accounting principles. The assessee company has failed to do so and has
> claimed that the revenue shown as per Profit and Loss account filed is as
> per a non- existent Indian 'GAAP' accounting norms. By claiming to show the
> revenue on a net basis, the assessee company has tried to avoid

> a) The TDS provisions applicable u/s. 195 of the Income Tax Act,
> specifically with respect to fees paid to Google Ireland ltd.

> b) Working out and showing correct income based on the gross revenue
> received by the assessee year on year.

> c) Showing correct revenue for the purpose of Transfer Pricing adjustment
> which is on a markup basis and correct Transfer Pricing evaluation method.

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 296 of 331

> d) Correct and proper method of arriving at ALP adjustment by the TPO of the
> department."

The findings of the AO have been affirmed by the Hon'ble DRP.

242\. Being aggrieved the assessee-company is in appeal before us with the
present appeal.

243\. The learned AR for the assessee vehemently contended that the
relationship between Google Ireland and assessee-company is of principal to
principal basis. He further contended that the AO was not justified in
rejecting the book results without discharging the onus lying upon it to prove
that the books of account maintained by the assessee were not correct and
complete. It was further argued that the assessee company made a complete
disclosure in the financial statements prepared in accordance with the
prescribed accounting standard issued by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India and there was no change in the accounting policy followed
by the assessee from the earlier years and the financial statements have been
duly audited by the statutory auditor who, after due verification of the books
of account opined that the financial statements of the assessee are prepared
in conformity with the accounting principles generally accepted. The AO was
not justified in rejecting the books of account without bringing any evidence
on record to demonstrate that the conditions specified in sub-section (3) of
Section 145 are met. Further the Ld. Counsel submitted that the profit
computed by the AO even after recasting the accounts is the same as computed
by the assessee company. Thus, it was contended that the AO was not justified
in invoking the provisions of Section 145 of the Act.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 297 of 331

244\. On the other hand, the Ld. Sr. Counsel for the Revenue vehemently
contended that the AO was justified in rejecting the books of account inasmuch
as the financial statements prepared by the assessee company do not reflect
the complete picture of the business operations of the assessee.

245\. We heard the rival submissions and perused the material on record. From
the mere perusal of the assessment order, it is clear that the AO though
mentioned that the provisions of Section 145 were invoked for the purpose of
recasting the profit and loss account to show the gross receipts of the
assessee-company from the AdWords business operations, this, in effect has no
material impact or change on the profits disclosed by the assessee company.
The difference in the method adopted by the AO and the assessee company is
only in the matter of presentation of the financial statements. It has no
impact on the profit or loss disclosed by the assessee company. The issue
becomes only academic in nature and hence we hold that the rejection of books
of account is not proper.

246\. In ground Nos.25 to 32, the assessee-company challenges the disallowance
made by the AO u/s.40(a)(ia) of the Act. The AO also disallowed the payment
made to Google Ireland by the assessee company on account of distribution fees
paid to it on the ground that no tax was deducted at source. The same was
confirmed by the Hon'ble DRP.

247\. Being aggrieved, assessee-company is in appeal in the present appeal.

248\. The learned Senior Counsel for assessee vehemently argued that when the
AO had invoked the provisions of Section 145, no further disallowance invoking
the provisions of Section 40(a)(ia) can be made. In this regard, reliance was
placed on the following decisions:

 Teja Constructions v. ACIT [(2010) 29 TTJ 57 (Hyd - Trib)] IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 298 of 331  Indwell Constructions v. CIT
[(1999) 151 CTR (AP HC)

249\. It was further argued that the AO had not brought any evidence on record
to justify that payments made by the assessee-company to Google Ireland in the
form of distribution fee is in the nature of Royalty. It is further contended
that the evidence brought on record by the assessee-company, the agreement
between the assessee and Google Ireland and the agreement between the assessee
and the Indian advertiser clearly establish that assessee-company acquired
right to market and distribute Google AdWords programme. The assessee-company
had acted on its own and not on behalf of Google Ireland. It is further
submitted that if the contention of the Revenue is to be accepted that the
assessee-company is only a dependent agent PE of Google Ireland Ltd, the
question of disallowance u/s.40(a)(ia) does not arise. Reliance in support of
this proposition was placed on the following decisions :

 CIT v. Heros Publicity Services [(2001) 248 ITR 256 (Bom)]  SET Satellite
(Singapore) P. Ltd [307 ITR 205]  CIT v. Century Building Industries P. Ltd
[(2007) 293 ITR 80 (Kar)]  CIT v. Cargo Linkers [(2008) 218 CTR (Del) 695]

250\. Without prejudice to the above, it was further contended that the
reasoning given by the TDS officer in the orders passed u/s. 201(1), cannot be
upheld in the light of the affidavit dt.14.03.2018 filed by the director of
the assessee company, submissions made on the factual aspect of the issue
before the bench on 19.03.2018 and the legal submissions made dt.20.03.2018 in
the assessee's appeals against the 201(1) order. The assessee also placed
reliance on the following decisions of the coordinate benches :  Pinstorm
Technologies P. Ltd v. ITO [(2012) 54 SOT 78 (Mumbai)]  ITO v. Right Florists
(P) Ltd [(2013) 25 ITR (T) 639 (Kol)] IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845,
949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 299 of 331  Yahoo India P. Ltd v. DCIT [(2011 46 SOT 105 (Mum)

251\. Further the learned Senior Counsel for assessee submitted that when the
assessee company is under bona fide belief that it was not under obligation to
deduct tax at source on the impugned payments, no disallowance u/s.40(a)(ia)
of the Act is not called for. In support of this submission he relied on the
Hon'ble Bombay High Court decision in the case of CIT vs. Kotak Securities
Ltd. (340 ITR 333)

252\. On the other hand, the Learned Senior Standing Counsel vehemently
contended that the payment made by the assessee- company to Google Ireland in
terms of the AdWords Agreement entered into is in the nature of licence fee
paid to its various AEs and therefore the payment constitutes royalty which is
liable for deduction of tax u/s.195 of the Act. Since the assessee had failed
to deduct tax at source the assessee-company has been rightly treated as an
assessee in default u/s.201(1) of the Act. He reiterated the same submissions
made in the appeals against the orders u/s.201(1) of the Act, to say that the
payments made by the assessee company to Google Ireland constitute 'Royalty'.

253\. We heard the rival submissions and perused the material on record. In
the appeals, filed by the assessee-company in ITA Nos.1190/Bang/2014, 949 &
950/Bang/2017 against the orders passed u/s.201(1) of the Act, after
considering the relevant facts and material on record, it was held by us that
the payments made by the assessee-company to Google Ireland in terms of
AdWords Distribution Programme constitutes 'Royalty' and therefore the
assessee-company is under an obligation to deduct tax at source u/s.195 of the
Act. Consequent to the failure by the assessee-company to do so, disallowance
u/s.40(a)(ia) of the Act is automatically attracted. The plea of the assessee-
company that when it is under bona fide belief that there was no obligation to
deduct tax at source IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 300 of 331 u/s.195, cannot be accepted as no factual foundation was laid
before us or lower authorities as to how the assessee-company entertained bona
fide belief that it was not under obligation to deduct tax at source on such
payments. The ratio of the decision of the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the
case of Kotak Securities Ltd. (supra) cannot be applied to the facts of the
present case as the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the said case granted relief
to the assessee considering the fact that payee has already paid the tax and
nearly for a period of decade both revenue and the assessee proceeded on a
footing that provisions of section 194J was not applicable to the payment of
transaction charges. It is also pertinent to note that the provisions of
section 40(a)(ia) starts with non obstante clause. A non- obstante clause is
usually used in a provision to indicate that the provision should prevail
despite anything to the contrary in the mentioned in such non-obstante clause.
In case there is any inconsistency or a departure between the non-obstante
clause and another provision, one of the objects of such a clause is to
indicate that it is the non-obstante clause which would prevail over teh other
clause [see CIT vs. Navabharat Enterprises (P) Ltd. (No.2)(1988) 170 ITR
332)(AP)] Therefore, the plea of bona fide belief has no place in the non-
obstante provisions of the Act.

254\. We accordingly confirm the order of the DRP in this regard

255\. The miscellaneous ground of appeal raised by the assessee-company
relates to challenge of levy of interest u/s.234B and initiation of penalty
proceedings u/s.271(1)(c) of the Act. These are all consequential in nature,
which do not require any adjudication, hence, dismissed as such.

256\. In the result, the appeals filed by the assessee-company is partly
allowed for statistical purposes.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 301 of 331

257\. IT(TP)A No.191/Bang/2014 [Revenue's appeal for assessment year 2009-10]:

The revenue raised the following grounds of appeal:

1\. "The order of the Dispute Resolution Panel is opposed to law and the facts
and circumstances of the case.

2\. The DRP erred in not accepting the application of the residual profit
method wherein the joint profit of the assessee and M/s Google Ireland Ltd.
has been computed by the TPO.

3\. The DRIP erred in concluding that the action of the TPO in merging the two
segments and then giving a rebate from the ITES profits from the residual
profits of the two parties as not proper without appreciating that the had
calculated profit on ITES activities which was not being deducted from the
residual profit.

4\. The DRP erred in holding that the assessee has rendered ITES to a wider
client base without appreciating that as per records the assessee has rendered
ITES to M/s Google Ireland Ltd. only and that as per the 3CEB report also ITES
has been rendered by the assessee to M/s Google Ireland Ltd. only.

5\. The DRP erred in holding that for implementing residual profit split
method the normal profit of M/s Google Ireland Ltd. also needs to computed and
reduced without appreciating that there is no routine profit of M/s Google
Ireland Ltd. as no other functions have been performed by M/s Google Ireland
Ltd. apart from contributing only the tangibles which is a non-routine
function and for which the TPO had already attributed 50% of residual profit.

6\. The DRP erred in holding that for the purposes of bench marking, ITES and
Adwords distribution segments are to be treated separately, without
appreciating that the international transactions relating to ITES and Adwords
are connected to each other and cannot be analyzed and evaluated separately
for determination of ALP.

7\. The DRP erred in directing to adopt profit split method for Adwords
distribution segment instead of profit split method without appreciating the
fact that the TPO had demonstrated the necessary evidences for the various
functions the assessee has performed such as rendering ITES to M/s Google
Ireland Ltd., providing marketing services and contribution of marketing
tangibles while M/s Google Ireland Ltd. has only contributed the technology
related intangibles.

8\. The Hon'ble DRP erred in directing the AO to follow the ratio laid down by
the Hon'ble Court in the case Tata Elxsi Limited 349 ITR 98 and exclude
telecommunication expenses of Rs. 10,99,83,459/- from export turnover also
while computing the deduction u/s 1OA of the I.T.Act without appreciating the
fact that there is no provision in section 10A that such expenses should be
the total turnover also, as clause (iv) of the explanation to section 10A
provides that such IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 302 of 331
expenses are to be reduced only from the export turnover.

9\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact that the jurisdictional High
Court's decision in the case of Tata Elxsi Limited 349 ITR 98 has not been
accepted by the department and an appeal has been filed before the Hon'ble
Supreme Court.

10\. The DRP erred in directing to exclude Coral Hubs on the ground of
functional incomparability without appreciating the fact that TNMM was applied
as the most appropriate method and while applying TNMM the functions of the
comparable need not be identical but a broad comparison is sufficient as many
of the differences are evened out at the net margin level.

11\. The DRP erred in directing that unallocated expenditure be taken into
consideration in the case of Acropetal Technologies without appreciating that
the comparable company itself has not taken the unallocated expenditure as
operating expenditure while publishing the segmental results.

12\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact that since M/s Google Ireland
Ltd. has neither filed its return of income nor was willing to admit any tax
liability in India. Hence, the additional profit of Rs. 30,65,47,268/- has
been taxed rightly in the hands of the assessee.

13\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact the additional profit of Rs.
30,65,47,268/- represents the profits evaded from being charged to income tax
in India of the service, Google Adwords run through the medium of Google
website in India.

14\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact as per the contract the
assessee is neither a captive service provider nor a cost centre to M/s Google
Ireland Ltd but the assessee claims to have been an independent distributor
acting on its own account.

15\. The DRP, on the facts and in the circumstance of the case erred in not
appreciating the fact that the assessee should have declared incomes with
respect to its revenues and not with respect to its cost as the whole
agreement with Ms/ Google Ireland Ltd is a ploy to evade payment of taxes in
India.

16\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact that it has been brought out
in great detail in the assessment order that the entire advertising business
(Adwords) is treated as one enterprise in India and that there is only one
profit earned out of the said enterprise.

17\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact that for the lack of a better
alternative the total Adwords revenue from the advertisers during the year was
considered at Rs. 403,34,38,319/- rather than consider the actual Adwords
revenue of Rs. 241,71,64,576/- in line with the global profits of Google Inc
USA and the profit represents the entire profit of the enterprise to be
charged to tax in India in the hands of M/S Google India Pvt. Ltd. as well as
M/s Google Ireland Ltd.

18\. The DRP erred in not appreciating the fact that Rs. 117.37 cores being
the difference between IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 303 of 331 the total turnover and the cost has been held to be the
escaped profit of the enterprise in India considering the fact that Google
Ireland Ltd. has neither filed its return if income nor is willing to admit
any tax liability in India.

19\. For these and such other grounds that may be urged at the time of
hearing, it is humbly prayed that the order of the DRP be reversed and that of
the Assessing Officer be restored.

20\. The appellate craves leave to add, to alter, to amend or delete any of
the grounds that may be urged at the time of hearing of the appeal."

258\. Ground Nos.1, 19 and 20 are general in nature and do not require any
adjudication.

259\. Ground Nos.2 to 7 challenges computation of ALP in respect of
international transactions entered into by the assessee-company with its AE.
In the assessee's appeal for same assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A
No.69/Bang./2014, the issue of determination of ALP in respect of Information
Technology (IT), ITeS and AdWords distribution programme is remanded to the
file of the AO/TPO for the purpose of undertaking fresh exercise of TP
analysis . In these circumstances, the grounds of appeal are also set aside to
the file of the AO/TPO as these grounds of appeal are consequential to the
grounds of appeal filed by the assessee-company. Thus, the grounds of appeal
are partly allowed for statistical purposes.

260\. Ground Nos.8 & 9challenges the finding of the Hon'ble DRP to reduce the
telecommunication expenditure incurred in foreign currency from both export
turnover and total turnover following the law laid down by the Hon'ble
jurisdictional High Court in CIT vs. Tata Elxsi (349 ITR 98).

261\. The issue in these grounds of appeal is no longer res integra as the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of CIT vs. HCLTechnologies Ltd.[(2018)(93
taxmann.com 33)(SC)] IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 304 of 331 confirmed the ratio of the decision of the Hon'ble Karnataka
High Court in the case of CIT vs. Tata Elxsi (349 ITR 98). The relevant
paragraphs are reproduced hereunder:

> "17. The similar nature of controversy, akin this case, arose before the
> Karnataka High Court in CIT v. Tata Elxsi Ltd. [2012] 204 Taxman 321/17. The
> issue before the Karnataka High Court was whether the Tribunal was correct
> in holding that while computing relief under Section10A of the IT Act, the
> amount of communication expenses should be excluded from the total turnover
> if the same are reduced from the export turnover? While giving the answer to
> the issue, the High Court, inter-alia, held that when a particular word is
> not defined by the legislature and an ordinary meaning is to be attributed
> to it, the said ordinary meaning is to be in conformity with the context in
> which it is used. Hence, what is excluded from 'export turnover' must also
> be excluded from 'total turnover', since one of the components of 'total
> turnover' is export turnover. Any other interpretation would run counter to
> the legislative intent and would be impermissible.

> 18\. Accordingly, the formula for computation of the deduction under Section
> 10A of the Act would be as follows:

> Export turnover as defined in Explanation 2 (IV) of Export Profit = total
> Section 10A of IT Act × Profit of the Business Export turnover as defined in
> Explanation 2(IV) of Section 10A of the IT Act + domestic sale proceeds

> 19\. In the instant case, if the deductions on freight, telecommunication
> and insurance attributable to the delivery of computer software under
> Section10A of the IT Act are allowed only in Export Turnover but not from
> the Total Turnover then, it would give rise to inadvertent, unlawful,
> meaningless and illogical result which would cause grave injustice to the
> Respondent which could have never been the intention of the legislature.

> 20\. Even in common parlance, when the object of the formula is to arrive at
> the profit from export business, expenses excluded from export turnover have
> to be excluded from total turnover also. Otherwise, any other interpretation
> makes the formula unworkable and absurd. Hence, we are satisfied that such
> deduction shall be allowed from the total turnover in same proportion as
> well.

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 305 of 331

> 21\. On the issue of expenses on technical services provided outside, we
> have to follow the same principle of interpretation as followed in the case
> of expenses of freight, telecommunication etc., otherwise the formula of
> calculation would be futile. Hence, in the same way, expenses incurred in
> foreign exchange for providing the technical services outside shall be
> allowed to exclude from the total turnover."

In the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of HCL
Technologies Ltd.(supra), the grounds of appeal filed by revenue are
dismissed.

262\. Grounds No.10 and 11 challenge the selection of comparables. Since in
the assessee's appeal, the very issue of TP analysis of entire functions
undertaken by the assessee-company in respect of international transactions is
remanded back to the file of the AO, the question of adjudication on selection
of comparable does not arise. Hence, the grounds of appeal filed by the
revenue are also partly allowed for statistical purposes.

263\. Ground Nos.12 to 18 challenges the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to
delete addition made on account of attribution of profits to Google Ireland
Ltd. The AO, vide para.27 of his order, opined that the profits arising out of
AdWords programme attributable to Google Ireland are not offered to tax.
Therefore, he proceeded to compute the amount of profits attributable to
Google Ireland as follows:

Year Ended December 31 in thousands except per share amount) Consolidated
statements of Income Data 2007 2008 2009 Revenues $ 1,65,93,986 $ 2,17,95,550
2,36,50,563 Costs and expenses Cost of revenues 66,49,085 86,21,506 88,44,115
Resarch and Development 21,19,985 27,93,1192 28,43,027 Sales and marketing
14,61,266 19,56,244 19,83,941 General and administrative 12,79,250 18,02,639
16,67,294  Contribution to Google Foundation 0 0 IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 306 of 331 Non-recurring portion oif settlement
of disputes 0 0 with Yahoo Total cost and expenses 1,15,09,586 1,51,63,581
1,53,38,377 Income from operations 50,84,400 66,31,969 83,12,186 Profit
percentage 30.64% 30.43% 35.15% Impairement of equity investments 0
(10,94,757) Interest income and other.net 5,89,580 3,16,384 69,003 Income
before income taxes 56,73,980 58,53,596 83,81,189 Provision for income taxes
14,70,260 16,26,738 18,60,741 Net Income $ 42,03,720 $ 42,26,858 $ 65,20,448

264\. Thus an amount of Rs.117,37,50,817/- was brought to tax as additional
income attributable to Google Ireland purportedly to be in the capacity of
agent of Google Ireland Ltd. The addition was deleted by the Hon'ble DRP on
the ground that the required adjustment was already made under the provisions
of section 92CA and no further adjustment was required.

265\. Before us, the revenue contended that the Hon'ble DRP is not justified
in directing deletion of this addition on the ground that this transaction is
already subject to ALP adjustment u/s 92CA of the Act. Learned CIT(D)R
submitted that provisions of section 92CA and section 9 operate in different
fields.

266\. On the other hand, learned Senior Counsel for assessee vehemently
contended that when the transaction between assessee and AE is subjected to
arm's length pricing, there can be no further attribution of profits to PE and
reliance in this regard was placed on the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court
in the case of Asst.DIT vs. E-funds IT Solution Inc .(399 ITR 34)(SC).

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 307 of 331

267\. We heard rival submissions and perused material on record. It is
undisputed fact that the transaction of AdWords programme between the
assessee-company and Google Ireland is subjected to bench marking. Recently,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of E-funds IT Solution Inc (supra)
reiterating the ratio laid down in the case of Director of Income-tax
(International Taxation) v. Morgan Stanley &Co.(292 ITR 416) held that once
the TP analysis undertaken, there is no further need to attribute profit to
PE. However, the said judgment in the case of Morgan Stanley & Co. (supra)
added a rider that a situation would be different if TP analysis does not
adequately reflect the functions performed and risks assumed by the
enterprise. In such a situation there would be a need to attribute profit to
PE for those functions and risks that have not been considered. Therefore, in
the assessee's appeal, since we have restored TP analysis afresh to the file
of AO/TPO, this issue also is set aside to the file of the AO to make de novo
assessment in light of principle laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Morgan Stanley & Co. and E-funds IT Solution Inc. (supra). Thus, these
grounds of appeal are also partly allowed.

268\. In the result, the appeal filed by the revenue is partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

269\. IT(TP)A No.68/Bang/2014 [Assessee's appeal for assessment year 2010-11]
The assessee-company raised the following grounds of appeal: "Based on the
facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld AO/Ld TPO and the Hon'ble
DRP have:

TRANSFER PRICING (TP) MATTERS Rejection of transfer pricing documentation and
making adjustments IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 308 of 331 1
Erred in rejecting the contemporaneous transfer pricing documentation (i.e.,
using data available before the due date of filing of return of income)
maintained by the Appellant and making adjustments in respect of the following
international transactions with Associated Enterprises (AEs):

> a) Provision of software development services = Rs. 91,95,38,461;

> b) Provision of Information Technology Enabled Services ('ITES') = Rs.

> 25,67,89,031; and

> c) Purchase of online advertisement space for distribution to the
> advertisers in India = Rs. 32,53,45,159.

Further, the Ld. TPO erred in adopting an approach different from the
predecessors in assessments up to assessment year 2008-09, without any change
in facts or circumstances of the transactions.

Rejection of use of multiple year data

2\. Erred in rejecting the use of multiple year data and using single year
data of the comparable companies to determine the arm's length price of the
international transactions without appreciating the fact that the same was not
available to the Appellant at the time of complying with the transfer pricing
documentation requirements.

Selection of companies earning super normal profits as comparables

3\. Erred in selecting certain companies which are earning super normal
profits as comparable to the Appellant.

Non-provision of adjustment for risk differences 4a) Erred in not appreciating
the fact that the Appellant operates as a risk free service provider and all
the key risks associated with the functions performed are borne by the foreign
AEs.

b) Erred in not providing adjustments taking into account the functional and
risk differences between the international transaction of the Appellant and
the comparable transactions in accordance with the provisions of Rule
I013(1)(e) of the Income-tax Rules, 1962.

Grounds specific to comparability analysis of software services transaction
IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 309 of 331

5\. Erred in rejecting the Function Asset and Risk ('FAR') analysis of the
international transaction relating to provision of software services and re-
characterizing the same as Knowledge Process Outsourcing ('KPO') services.

6\. Erred in not undertaking an objective search and selecting the following
companies as comparables on an ad-hoc basis:

a) Eclerx Services Ltd; and

b) Genesys International Corporation Grounds specific to comparability
analysis of ITES transactions

7\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
selecting the following companies as comparable to the ITES of the Appellant:

    
    
                  a)      Accentia Technologies Ltd;
                  b)      Infosys BPO Ltd; and
    
    

8\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
rejecting the following comparable companies:

    
    
             a)    AUsec Technologies Ltd;
             b)    Axis lT&T Ltd;
             c)    Caliber Point Business Solutions Ltd (Segment)
             d)    CG-VakSofware& Exports Ltd (Segment);
             e)    e4e Healthcare business services Pvt Ltd (Segment);
             f)    Jindal IntellicomPvt Ltd;
             g)    Microgenetics Systems Ltd;
             h)    Microland Ltd (Segment)
             i)    R Systems International Ltd (Segment); `
    
    

Grounds specific to TP adjustments relating to payment for Ad Words

9\. a) Erred in not undertaking an objective Functions Assets and Risks
('FAR') analysis of the international transactions relating to distribution of
online advertisement space and concluding that the Appellant owns marketing
intangibles.

b) Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant performs a limited
role in the provision of online advertisement space and that the AEs undertake
the key economically significant functions.

10\. Erred in rejecting Transaction Net Margin Method ('TNMM') and determining
the IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 310 of 331
ALP by applying Profit Split Method ('PSM') as the most appropriate method.

11\. Erred in not applying PSM in accordance with the provisions of Rule lOB
of the Income Tax Rules, 1962.

12\. Erred in applying PSM, not determining correctly the relative
contribution made by the AEs in earning the revenue on the basis of the FAR
analysis of the transactions and how such contribution would be evaluated by
unrelated enterprises performing comparable functions in similar
circumstances.

13\. Erred in not determining the combined net profit of the international
transactions to be split amongst the enterprises in proportion of their
relative contribution.

14\. Erred in not evaluating and providing for the relative contribution made
by the AEs in the form of extended credit period to the Appellant CORPORATE
TAX MATTERS Rejection of Books of accounts

15\. Erred in holding that the duly audited books of account of the Appellant
are incomplete and incorrect based on conjectures and surmises without
appreciating the complete disclosures made in the books of accounts maintained
by the Appellant.

Re-computation of deduction u/s IOA of the Act 16 Erred in concluding that the
communication expenses incurred by the Appellant are attributable to delivery
of computer software outside India and thereby, reducing the same from export
turnover for computing the deduction u/s 1 OA of the Act.

17\. Without prejudice to Ground 16, erred in considering the whole of
communication expenses (comprising telephone charges and internet expenses)
incurred by the Appellant as attributable to the delivery of computer software
outside India for computing the deduction u/s 10 of the Act.

Disallowance of payments made to Google Ireland Limited invoking provisions of
section 40(a)(i) of the Act

18\. Erred in holding that the amounts payable by the Appellant to Google
Ireland Limited for purchase of online advertisement space under the AdWords
Program were chargeable to tax in India.

I IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 311 of 331

19\. Erred in holding that the Appellant, in relation to distribution of
advertisement space under the Ad Words program, create a Dependent Agent
Permanent Establishment of Google Ireland Limited under Article 5 of the
India-Ireland Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement.

20\. Having held that the Appellant was an agent of Google Ireland Limited
erred in holding that Appellant 'was a person responsible for paying' any
amount to Google Ireland Limited. within the meaning of section 195 of the Act
and that the Appellant has failed to deduct tax at source on the amounts
payable to Google Ireland Limited.

21\. Having held that the Appellant creates a Dependent Agent Permanent
Establishment of Google Ireland Limited in India, erred in attributing
business profits, ignoring the fact that the Ld TPO has determined the arm's
length remuneration for the Appellant and hence there was no additional income
chargeable to tax in India in the hands of Google Ireland Limited requiring
any deduction of tax at source under Section 195 of the Act and hence no
disallowance under section 40(a)(i) of the Act is warranted.

22\. Erred in alternatively holding the amount payable towards purchase of
advertisement space under the Agreement as either Royalties or Fees for
Technical Services under Article 12 of the India-Ireland Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement.

23\. Erred in upholding that the Appellant was required to deduct tax at
source from the amount payable by the Appellant to Google Ireland Limited and
in view of its failure to deduct tax, the amount payable by the Appellant to
Google Ireland Limited was required to be disallowed u/s 40(a)(i) of the Act.

OTHERS

24\. Erred in considering the eligible MAT credit u/s 11 5JAA of the Act at Rs
565,306 as against the eligible brought forward MAT credit of Rs 8,81,87,191.

25\. Erred in considering the refund already issued to the Company u/s 143(1)
at Rs 9,37,80,480 instead of the actual amount of refund of Rs 6,58,06,480
received bythe Appellant thereby increasing the total tax demand.

25\. Having erred in considering the refund amount of Rs 9,37,80,480, erred in
levying the interest u/s 234D of the Act on refund amount of Rs 9,37,80,480 as
against the actualrefund received of Rs 6,58,06,480.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 312 of 331

26\. Erred in imposing the levy of interest u/s 234B of the Act.

27\. Erred in initiating the penalty proceedings initiated u/s 271(1)(c) of
the Act.

The Appellant craves, to consider each of the above grounds of appeal
independentlywithout prejudice to one another and craves leave to add, alter,
delete or modify all or any ofthe above grounds of appeal."

270\. Ground Nos.1 to 14 relates to TP analysis and selection of comparable
etc. In the identical facts, in assessee's own case for AY 2009-10, the issues
raised in these grounds of appeal were restored to the file of AO/TPO for the
purpose of undertaking fresh TP analysis etc. For parity of reasons given
therein, these grounds of appeal are restored to the file of the AO with
similar directions.

271\. Ground No.15 challenges rejection of book results. As stated by us in
the assessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang)/2014,
though the AO has stated that book results are rejected, in effect there is no
rejection of book results as the profit even after recasting the P&L Account
remained the same. Thus, this ground of appeal becomes academic in nature and
is dismissed as such.

272\. Ground Nos.16 & 17 challenges finding of lower authorities in reducing
communication expenditure only from export turnover. The issue in these
grounds of appeal is no longer res integra as the issue is decided in favour
of the assessee-company in the case of HCLTechnologies Ltd.HCL Technology
(supra). Thus these grounds of appeal are allowed.

273\. Ground Nos.18 to 23 challenges the addition u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act on
the ground that the assessee-company had not deducted TDS on payments of
royalty made to IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 313 of 331
Google Ireland Ltd. For the detailed reasons given by us in the assessee's
appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014 we confirm the
addition made u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act. Accordingly, these grounds of appeal
are dismissed.

274\. The other grounds of appeal are consequential in nature and do not
require adjudication.

275\. In the result, the appeal filed by the assessee is partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

276\. IT(TP)A No.205/Bang/2015 [Revenue's appeal for assessment year 2010-11]
The revenue raised the following grounds of appeal:

1\. The directions of the Dispute Resolution Panel are opposed to law and
facts of the case.

2\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case the Dispute Resolution
Panel erred in law in directing the AO to exclude reimbursement of specific
expenditure both from the export turnover as well as from total turnover for
the purpose of computation of deduction u/s 10A, without appreciating the fact
that the statute allows exclusion of such expenditure only from export
turnover by way of specific definition of export turnover as envisaged by Sub-
clause (4) of Explanation 2 below Sub-section (8) of Section 10A and the total
turnover has not been defined in this Section.

3\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case the Dispute Resolution
Panel erred in directing the AO to compute deduction u/s 10A in the above
manner by placing reliance on the decision of Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka
in the case of M/s Tata Elxsi Ltd., which has riot become final since the same
has not been accepted by the Department and SLPs are pending before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court.

4\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case the Dispute Resolution
Panel ought to have appreciated the fact that since MIs Google Ireland Ltd.
has neither filed return of income nor willing to admit any taxability in
India, the additional profit of Rs 79,21,20,928 has been taxed rightly in the
hands of the assessee concern only by the AO.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 314 of 331 This amount
represents the profits evaded to have been taxed in India from
Adwordsenterprise run through the medium of Google website in India.

5\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Dispute Resolution
Panel erred in holding that for the purpose of bench marking ITES and Adword
distribution segment to be treated separately without appreciating the fact
that international transactions related to lTES and Adword are connected to
each other and they cannot be analyzed and evaluated for ALP separately.

6\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Dispute Resolution
Pane erred in directing the TPO/AO to adopt profit split method pertaining to
Adword distribution segment instead of applying the residual profit method
without appreciating the fact that the TPO has already demonstrated with
necessary evidence on record that the assessee has performed varied functions
such as rendering ITES to Google Ireland, providing marketing services and
contributing Technology related intangibles.

7\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case the Dispute Resolution
Panel erred in directing to exclude M/s Acropetal technologies Ltd a
comparable without appreciating the fact that when TNMM is applied as Most.
Appropriate Method, the functions of the comparable need not be identical and
a broad comparison of rendering IT related services is sufficient becaus many
of the differences are evened out at net margin level.

8\. For these and other grounds that may be urged at the time of hearing, it
is prayed that the directions of the Dispute Resolution Panel in so far as it
relat€ to the above grounds may be reversed.

9\. The appellant craves leave to add, alter, amend and I or delete any of the
grounds mentioned above.

277\. Grounds No.1, 8 and 9 are general in nature and do not require
adjudication.

278\. Ground Nos.2 and 3 challenges the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to direct
AO to exclude reimbursement of expenditure incurred in foreign currency both
from export turnover as well as total turnover. The issue in these grounds of
appeal is no longer res integra as the issue is decided in favour of the
assessee-company in the case of HCL Technologies Ltd. (supra). Thus these
grounds of appeal are dismissed.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 315 of 331

279\. Ground No.4 challenges the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to the AO to
delete addition on account of attribution of profits to PE of Google Ireland
Ltd. In the earlier year i.e. 2009-10, this issue was remanded to the file of
the AO for de novo assessment in the light of the principles laid down by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Morgan Stanley & Co. (supra). This ground of
appeal is remitted back to the file of the AO for de novo assessment.

280\. Grounds No.5 to 7 challenges the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to bench
mark the transaction under ITeS and AdWords distribution separately and apply
the profit split method in respect of AdWords distribution programme and
selection of comparable in IT related services. For the reasons stated in
theassessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014 ,
we remit these grounds of appeal back to the file of the AO/TPO for the
purpose of undertaking fresh TP analysis on the lines indicated therein, Thus
these grounds of appeal are partly allowed for statistical purposes.

281\. In the result, the appeal filed by the revenue is partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

282\. ITA No.1299/Bang/2015 (Revenue's appeal for assessment year 2010-11):

This is an appeal filed by the Revenue directed against the order passed by
the AO giving effect to the directions of the Hon'ble DRP passed u/s 154 dated
29/6/2015. Hon'ble DRP had directed the AO to verify and apply the profit
margin of Google Ireland based on statements available for determination of
profit by applying profit split method.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 316 of 331

283\. The revenue raised the following grounds of appeal:

1\. "The directions of the Dispute Resolution Panel are opposed to law and
facts of the case.

2\. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Hon'ble Dispute
Resolution Panel erred in directing the TPO to verify the available financial
statement of Google Ireland for verification of the profit margin,

3\. For these and other grounds that may be urged at the time of hearing, it
is prayed that the directions of the Dispute Resolution Panel in so far as it
relates to the above grounds may be reversed.

4\. The appellant craves leave to add, alter, amend and /or delete any of the
grounds mentioned above."

284\. In the assessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A
No.69/Bang/2009, since we restored the entire issue of TP adjustment to the
file of the AO/TPO, the appeal becomes infructuous

285\. In the result, the appeal filed by the revenue in IT(TP)A
No.1299/Bang/2015 is allowed for statistical purposes.

286\. IT(TPA) No.559/Bang/2016 [Assessee's appeal for assessment year
2011-12]:

The assessee-company raised the following grounds of appeal:

"Based on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld AO/Ld TPO and
the Hon'ble DRP have:

TRANSFER PRICING (TP) MATTERS Rejection of transfer pricing documentation and
making adjustments IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 317 of 331

1\. Erred in rejecting the contemporaneous transfer pricing documentation
(i.e., using data available before the due date of filing of return of income)
maintained by the Appellant and making adjustments in respect of the
international transaction with Associated Enterprises (AEs) Rejection of use
of multiple year data

2\. Erred in rejecting the use of multiple year data and using single year
data of the comparable companies which was not available to the Appellant at
the time of complying with the transfer pricing documentation requirements, to
determine the arm's length price of the international transactions.

3\. Non-provision of adjustment for risk differences

a) Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant operates as a risk
free service provider and all the key risks associated with the functions
performed are based on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld
AO/Ld TPO and the Hon'ble DRP have:

b) Erred in not providing adjustments taking into account the functional and
risk differences between the international transaction of the appellant and
the comparable transactions in accordance with the provisions of Rule
10B(1)(e) of the Income-tax Rules,1962 Incorrect margin computation of certain
companies 4 a) Erred in computing segmental margin of ICRA Online Ltd.
(Outsourced services segment) at 34.21% vis-à-vis the correct margin at 25.15%

b) Erred in not allocating the unallocated income and expenditure while
computing the segmental margin of ICRA Online Ltd. (Outsourced services
segment) Grounds specific to comparability analysis of software services
transaction

5\. Erred in rejecting the Function Asset and Risk ('FAR') analysis of the
international transaction relating to provision of software services and re-
characterizing the same as Knowledge Process Outsourcing ('KPO') services and
inter-alia selecting Accentia technologies Limited as comparable to the IT
services transactions.

6\. Without prejudice, erred in not undertaking an objective comparative
analysis to select all KPO companies as comparables.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 318 of 331 Grounds specific to
comparability analysis of ITES transactions 7 Erred in not undertaking an
objective comparative analysis and inter-alia selecting the following company
as comparable to the ITES of the Appellant:

a) Accentia Technologies Ltd

8\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
rejecting the following comparable companies:

> a) Caliber Point Business Solutions Ltd (BPO segment);

> b) R Systems International Ltd (BPO segment);

> c) Datamatics Financial Services Ltd.

d) Informed Technologies India Ltd., and

e) Microland Limited (call centre segment) Grounds specific to TP adjustments
on payments for web-based advertisement procured for distribution to
advertisers in India

9\. a) Erred in not undertaking an objective Functions Assets and Risks
('FAR') analysis of the international transactions relating to distribution of
internet advertisements and concluding that the Appellant owns marketing
intangibles.

b)Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant performs a limited
role in the provision of internet advertisement and that the AEs undertake the
key economically significant functions.

10\. a) Erred in rejecting Transaction Net Margin Method ('TNMM') and
determining the ALP by applying Profit Split Method ('PSM') as the most
appropriate method.

b) Erred in not applying PSM in accordance with the provisions of Rule 10B of
the Income Tax Rules, 1962 and following an erroneous methodology.

c) Erred in not determining the correct contribution made by all the AEs in
relation to the advertisement business.

11\. Erred in not providing requisite adjustment for the contribution made by
the AE in the form of credit granted for the amount payable by the Appellant
to the AE towards purchase of online advertisement space.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 319 of 331 CORPORATE TAX MATTERS
Rejection of Books of accounts

12\. Erred in holding that the duly audited books of account of the Appellant
are incomplete and incorrect based on conjectures and surmises without
appreciating the complete disclosures made in the books of accounts maintained
by the Appellant.

Re-computation of deduction u/s 10A of the Act

13\. Erred in concluding that the communication expenses incurred by the
Appellant are attributable to delivery of computer software outside India and
thereby, reducing the same from export turnover for computing the deduction
u/s 10A of the Act.

14\. Erred in considering the whole of communication expenses (even related to
telephone charges and internet expenses) incurred by the Appellant as
attributable to the delivery of computer software outside India for and
reducing it from export turnover for the purpose of computing the deduction
u/s 1 OA of the Act.

15\. Not reducing the amount of communication expenses from the amount of
total turnover for the purpose of computing deduction u/s 1 OA of the Act.

Disallowance of payments made to Google Ireland Limited invoking provisions of
section 40(a)(i) of the Act

16\. Erred in holding that the amounts payable by the Appellant to Google
Ireland Limited for purchase of online advertisement space under the AdWords
Program were chargeable to tax in India.

17\. Erred in holding that the Appellant, in relation to distribution of
online advertisement space under the AdWords program, create a Dependent Agent
Permanent Establishment of Google Ireland Limited under Article 5 of the
India-Ireland Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement and the receipts are taxable
as business profits in India.

18\. Having held that the Appellant was an agent of Google Ireland Limited
erred in holding that Appellant 'was a person responsible for paying' any
amount to Google Ireland Limited within the meaning of section 195 of the Act
and that the Appellant has failed to deduct tax at source on the amounts
payable to Google Ireland Limited.

19\. Having held that the Appellant creates a Dependent Agent Permanent
Establishment of Google Ireland Limited in India, ignoring the fact that the
Ld TPO has already IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017,
IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 320 of 331
determined the arm's length remuneration for the Appellant and that there was
no additional income chargeable to tax in India, erred in attributing income
chargeable to tax in India requiring deduction of tax at source under Section
195 of the Act. On this premise making a disallowance u/s 40(a)(i) of the Act,
which is not warranted.

20\. Erred in alternatively holding the amount payable towards purchase of
online advertisement space under the Agreement as either Royalties or Fees for
Technical Services under Article 12 of the India-Ireland Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement.

21\. Erred in upholding that the amount payable by the Appellant to Google
Ireland Ltd for purchase of online advertisement space was chargeable to tax
in India and Appellant was required to deduct tax at source from the amount
payable and in view of its failure to deduct tax, the amount payable by the
Appellant to Google Ireland Limited was required to be disallowed u/s 40(a)(i)
of the Act.

OTHERS

22\. Erred in considering the eligible TDS at Rs 16,01,49,685 as against the
TDS credit of Rs 16,68,09,760 available to the Company.

23\. Erred in imposing the levy of interest u/s 234B of the Act.

24\. Erred in initiating the penalty proceedings initiated u/s 271(1)(c) of
the Act.

The Appellant craves, to consider each of the above grounds of appeal
independently without prejudice to one another and craves leave to add, alter,
delete or modify all or any of the above grounds of appeal."

287\. Ground Nos.1 to 11 relates to TP analysis and selection of comparable
etc. In the identical facts, in assessee's own case for assessment year
2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014, the issues raised in these grounds of
appeal were restored to the file of AO/TPO for the purpose of undertaking
fresh TP analysis etc. For parity of reasons given therein, these grounds of
appeal are restored to the file of the AO with similar directions.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 321 of 331

288\. Ground No.12 challenges rejection of book results. As stated by us in
the assessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang)/2014,
though the AO has stated that book results are rejected, in effect there is no
rejection of book results as the profit even after recasting the P&L Account
remained the same. Thus, this ground of appeal becomes academic in nature and
is dismissed as such.

289\. Ground Nos.13 to 15 challenges finding of lower authorities in reducing
communication expenditure only from export turnover. The issue in these
grounds of appeal is no longer res integra as the issue is decided in favour
of the assessee-company in the case of HCLTechnologies Ltd. (supra). Thus
these grounds of appeal are allowed.

290\. Ground Nos.16 to 21 challenges the addition u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act on
the ground that the assessee-company had not deducted TDS on payments of
royalty made to Google Ireland Ltd. For the detailed reasons given by us in
the assessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014
we confirm the addition made u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act. Accordingly, these
grounds of appeal are dismissed.

291\. The other grounds of appeal viz. 22 to 24 are consequential in nature
and do not require adjudication.

292\. In the result, the appeal filed by the assessee is partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 322 of 331

293\. IT(TP)A No.881/Bang/2015 [Revenue's appeal for assessment year 2011-12]
The revenue raised the following grounds of appeal:

i. "The directions of the DRP are opposed to law and facts of the case.

ii. In the facts and circumstances of the case, Whether the Hon'ble DRP is
correct in holding that the M/s Acropetal Technologies Ltd cannot be taken as
comparable, when it satisfies all the qualitative and quantitative filters
adopted by the TPO.

iii. Whether the Hon'ble DRP is right in applying "onsite revenue filter"
without appreciating the fact that the function carried out is "Software
Development" irrespective of whether onsite or offshore.

iv. Whether the Hon'ble DRP in correct in excluding M/s Acropetal Technologies
on the ground that it has significant onsite revenue without appreciating the
fact that onsite development of software entails more cost and thereby results
in lower profit margins.

v. Whether the Hon'ble DRP was right in seeking exact comparability while
searching for comparable companies of the assessee under TNMM method whereas
requirement of law and international jurisprudence require seeking similar
comparable companies.

vi. Whether the Hon'ble DRP erred in facts and law in excluding the company as
a comparable, on the ground of failing the service income filter, when only
the segmental results have been considered for comparability vii. Whether the
Hon'ble DRIP ought to have appreciated the fact that when segmental results
are available and considered for comparability, the application of service
income to total income filter does not arise viii. Whether the Hon'ble
DRPerred in fact and law in rejecting the comparable on the ground that
segmental information is not available, when the company had classified itself
to be operating in one segment i.e. provision of ITES ix. Whether the order of
the Hon'ble DRP in rejecting comparable cases by insistence on strict
comparability under TNMM defeats the very purpose of the law relating to
determination of ALP under income Tax Act?

x. Whether Hon'ble DRP is justified in holding that for purpose of bench
marking ITES and Adword distribution segment to be treated separately in the
light of the fact that international transactions related to ITES and Adword
are connected to each other and IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 323 of 331 they cannot be analysed and evaluated for ALP separately.

xi. Whether the Hon'ble DRP is justified in directing to adopt profit split
method pertaining to Adword distribution segment instead of applying the
residual profit method in the light of the fact that the TPO has already
demonstrated with necessary evidence on record that the Assessee has performed
varied functions such as rendering ITES to Google Ireland, providing marketing
services and contribution of Marketing tangibles whereas the Google Ireland
has performed the function of contributing Technology related intangibles.

xii. Whether while seeking the exact comparability as mentioned above the DRP
was right in fact and in law in imposing condition beyond law whereas the
requirement of law is to acknowledge only those differences that are likely to
materially affect the margin.

xiii. Whether the Hon'ble DRP is correct in fact and law in disregarding the
position of law that there could be differences between the enterprises
compared under the TNMM method that are not likely to materially affect the
price or cost charged or the profits accruing to such enterprise xiv. On the
facts and circumstances of the case the DRP ought to have appreciated the fact
that Since M/s Google Ireland Ltd., has neither filed return of income nor
willing to admit any tax liability in India, the additional profit of
Rs.1,43,44,10,156- has been rightly taxed in the hands of the assessee concern
by the AO. This amount represents the profits evaded that should have been
taxed in Insdia from Adwords enterprise run through the medium of Google
Website in India.

The DRP has erred in holding that the expenses reduced from the ETO has to be
reduced from the ITO also. As total turnover has not been defined u/s 10A
which provides for exclusion of such expenses from Total turnover also.

The DRP failed to appreciate the fact that the decision of the High Court of
Karnataka has not been accepted by the Department in the case of CIT Vs Tata
Elxsi Ltd., and an SLID has been filed against the decision before the Apex
Court which has not been adjudicated upon.

294\. Grounds No.1 to 13 challenge the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to bench
mark the transaction under ITeS and AdWords distribution separately and apply
the profit split method in respect of AdWords distribution programme and
selection of comparable in IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 324 of 331 IT related services. For the reasons stated in the assessee's
appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014 , we remit these
grounds of appeal back to the file of the AO/TPO for the purpose of
undertaking fresh TP analysis on the lines indicated therein, Thus these
grounds of appeal are partly allowed for statistical purposes.

295\. Ground No.14 challenges the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to the AO to
delete addition on account of attribution of profits to PE of Google Ireland
Ltd. In the earlier year i.e. 2009-10, this issue was remanded to the file of
the AO for de novo assessment in the light of the principles laid down by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Morgan Stanley. This ground of appeal is
remitted back to the file of the AO for de novo assessment.

296\. In the result, the appeal filed by the revenue is partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

297\. IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017 [Assessee's appeal for assessment year 2012-13]

298\. The assesse-company raised the following grounds of appeal:

> "Based on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld AO/Ld TPO
> and the Hon'ble DRP have:

> TRANSFER PRICING (TP) MATTERS Rejection of transfer pricing documentation
> and making adjustments

1\. Erred in rejecting the contemporaneous transfer pricing documentation
(i.e., using data available before the due date of filing of return of income)
maintained by the Appellant, and making adjustments in respect of the
international transactions with Associated Enterprises (AEs) IT(IT)ANos.1190,
1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68,
205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016,
IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 325 of 331 Rejection of use of multiple year
data

2\. Erred in rejecting the use of multiple year data, and instead used single
year data pertaining to FY 2011-12 of alleged companies without considering
the fact that such data was not available to the Appellant at the time of
complying with the transfer pricing documentation requirements to determine
the arm's length price of the international transactions.

Non-provision of adjustment for risk differences

3\. a) Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant operates as a
risk freeservice provider and all the key risks associated with the functions
performed and assets employed are borne by the foreign AEs.

b) Erred in not providing appropriate adjustment to take into account the
difference in risks profile of the Appellant vis-à-vis the alleged comparable
companies in accordance with the provisions of Rule 10B(1) (e) of the Income-
tax Rules, 1962. Application of additional filters

4\. Erred in application of the following arbitrary filter for undertaking the
comparabilityanalysis under TNMM:

> a) Rejection of companies having financial year end other than 31 March
> 2012; and

> b) Rejecting companies having export revenue are more than 76 percent of
> revenue.

Grounds specific to comparability analysis of software services transaction

5\. Erred in rejecting the analysis of Functions performed, Assets employed
and Risks assumed (FAR analysis') for the international transaction relating
to provision of software services and re-characterizing the same as Knowledge
Process Outsourcing (KPO') services.

6\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
rejecting the following KPO companies as comparable to the software services
of the Appellant

a) Acropetal Technologies Limited;

    
    
          b)      Informed Technologies Limited;
          c)      Sundaram Business Services Limited; and
          d)      Tata Elxsi Limited
    
    

7\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
rejecting the following KPO company additionally proposed by the Appellant
where international transaction relating to provision of software services is
being re-

> IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
> 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
> 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 326 of 331 characterized as
> KPO:

> a) Cheers Interactive (India) Private Limited Grounds specific to
> comparability analysis of lIES transactions

8\. Erred in rejecting the analysis of Functions performed, Assets employed
and Risks assumed ('FAR analysis') for the international transaction relating
to provision of ITES and inter-alia considering high-end service providers as
comparable to the Appellant.

9\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
selecting the following functionally different companies as comparable to the
ITES services of the Appellant:

    
    
          a)      Accentia Technologies Limited;
          b)      BNR Udyog Limited (Medical Transcription segment);
          c)      lnfosys BPO Limited; and
          d)      TCS E Serve Limited
    
    

10\. Erred in not undertaking an objective comparative analysis and inter-alia
rejecting the following comparable companies:

    
    
    a)     Datamatics Financial Services Ltd
    b)     Sundaram Business Services Ltd;
    c)     Microland Limited (Segmental);
    d)     ACE BPO Services Private Limited; and
    e)     Cheers Interactive (India) Private Limited.
    
    

11\. Erred in rejecting certain comparable companies and adding certain
companies to the final set of comparable companies for the impugned
transaction on an adhoc basis, thereby resorting to cherry picking of
comparable companies to determine arm's length price for the ITES transaction.

12\. Erred in vitiating the principles of natural justice by rejecting 'Jindal
Intellicom Limited' in its Directions without giving the Appellant an
opportunity of being heard.

Grounds specific to TP adjustments on payments for web-based advertisement
space procured for distribution to advertisers in India

13\. a) Erred in not undertaking an objective analysis of Functions performed,
Assets employed and Risks assumed (FAR analysis') for the international
transaction IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A
Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69,
191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 327 of 331
relating to distribution of internet based advertisements space and concluding
that the Appellant owns marketing intangibles.

b) Erred in not appreciating the fact that the Appellant performs limited role
being reseller of online ad space and that the AEs undertake the key
economically significant functions in this regard.

14\. a) Erred in rejecting Transaction Net Margin Method ('TNMM') and
determiningthe ALP by applying Profit Split Method (PSM') as the most
appropriate method.

b) Erred in not applying PSM in accordance with the provisions of Rule
1013(1)(d) of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 and thereby resorting to an erroneous
methodology.

c) Erred in not considering the contribution made by all the AEs of the
Appellant in relation to the advertisement business in India.

d) Erred in not considering the third party costs incurred by the Appellant
towards provision of ITES services which have been alleged by the theLdAO!Ld
TPO and the Hon'ble DRIP to be intrinsically linked to the advertisement
segment.

15\. Erred in not providing requisite adjustment for the contribution made by
the AE in the form of credit granted for the amount payable by the Appellant
to the AE towards purchase of advertisement space.

CORPORATE TAX MATTERS Rejection of Books of accounts

16\. Erred in holding that the duly audited books of account of the Appellant
are incompleteand incorrect based on conjectures and surmises without
appreciating the complete disclosures made in the books of accounts maintained
by the Appellant.

Disallowance of payments made to Google Ireland Limited (GIL) invoking
provisions of section 40(a)(i) of the Act

17\. Erred in holding that the amounts payable by the Appellant to GIL for
purchase of online advertisement space under the AdWords Program were
chargeable to tax in India.

18\. Erred in holding that the Appellant, in relation to distribution of
online advertisement space under the Ad Words program, create a Dependent
Agent Permanent Establishment ('DAPE') of GIL under Article 5 of the India-
Ireland Double Taxation IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 328 of 331 Avoidance Agreement and the receipts are taxable as business
profits in India.

19\. Having held that the Appellant creates a DAPE of GIL in India, ignoring
the fact that the Ld TPO has already determined the arm's length remuneration
for the Appellant and that there was no additional income chargeable to tax in
India, erred in attributing income chargeable to tax in India requiring
deduction of tax at source under Section 195 of the Act

20\. Having held that the Appellant was an agent of GIL erred in holding that
Appellant 'was a person responsible for paying' any amount to GIL within the
meaning of section 195 of the Act and that the Appellant has failed to deduct
tax at source on the amounts payable to GIL

21\. Erred in alternatively holding the amount payable towards purchase of
online advertisement space under the Agreement as either Royalties or Fees for
Technical Services under Article 12 of the India-Ireland Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement.

22\. Erred in holding that the Appellant was required to deduct tax at source
from the amount payable to GIL and in view of its failure to deduct tax, the
amount payable by the Appellant to GIL was required to be disallowed u/s
40(a)(i) of the Act.

Additional Attribution of profits to Google India

23\. The Ld AO has erred in re-computing the profits of the Assessee from
distribution of advertisement space under the AdWords program in India, by
attributing the profit percentage of Google Inc, USA.

24\. The Ld AO has erred in attributing an additional amount of Rs.
232,65,45,142 over and above the amount payable by the Company to GIL which to
that extent amounts p multiple additions of the same amount.

25\. The Ld AO has erred in passing a contingent order, depending on the view
that may be taken by the appellate authority, thereby refraining from
determining the exact tax liability of the Assessee.

    
    
    
    
    Miscellaneous
    
    26. Erred in considering the eligible TDS at Rs.30,22,71 ,081 as          against the     TDS credit
    of Rs.30,61 ,44,745 available to the    Company.
    

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 329 of 331

27\. Erred in disallowing the MAT credit amounting to Rs.31,19,71,193 eligible
to the Company for the AY 2012-13.

28\. Erred in imposing the levy of interest u/s 234B of the Act.

29\. Erred in imposing the levy of interest u/s 234D of the Act.

30\. Erred in initiating the penalty proceedings initiated u/s 271 (1)(c) of
the Act:

The Appellant craves, to consider each of the above grounds of appeal
independently without prejudice to one another and craves leave to add, alter,
delete or modify all or any of the above grounds of appeal."

299\. Grounds No.1 to 4 are not pressed and accordingly dismissed as such.

300\. Ground Nos.5 to 15 relates to TP analysis and selection of comparable
etc. In the identical facts, in assessee's own case for AY 2009-10, the issues
raised in these grounds of appeal were restored to the file of AO/TPO for the
purpose of undertaking fresh TP analysis etc. For parity of reasons given
therein, these grounds of appeal are restored to the file of the AO with
similar directions.

301\. Ground No.16 challenges rejection of book results. As stated by us in
the assessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang)/2014,
though the AO has stated that book results are rejected, in effect there is no
rejection of book results as the profit even after recasting the P&L Account
remained the same. Thus, this ground of appeal becomes academic in nature and
is dismissed as such.

IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374,
466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015, IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559,
881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017  Page 330 of 331

302\. Ground Nos.17 to 22 challenges the addition u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act on
the ground that the assessee-company had not deducted TDS on payments of
royalty made to Google Ireland Ltd. For the detailed reasons given by us in
the assessee's appeal for assessment year 2009-10 in IT(TP)A No.69/Bang/2014
we confirm the addition made u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act. Accordingly, these
grounds of appeal are dismissed.

303\. Ground Nos.23 to 25 challenges the direction of the Hon'ble DRP to the
AO to delete addition on account of attribution of profits to PE of Google
Ireland Ltd. In the earlier year i.e. 2009-10, this issue was remanded to the
file of the AO for de novo assessment in the light of the principles laid down
by the Honb'le Apex Court in the case of Morgan Stanley & Co. (supra). This
ground of appeal is remitted back to the file of the AO for de novo
assessment.

304\. The other grounds of appeal are consequential in nature and do not
require adjudication. Accordingly this appeal is partly allowed for
statistical purposes.

305\. In the result, assessee's appeals IT(IT)A No.1190/Bang/2014 is dismissed
and IT(IT)A No. 2845, 949, 950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos. 374/Bang/2013,
68/Bang/2015, 69/Bang/2014, 387/Bang/2017, 559/Bang/2016 are partly allowed
for statistical purposes, and Revenue's appeals IT(IT)A No. 1295/Bang/2014 is
allowed for statistical IT(IT)ANos.1190, 1295/Bang/2014, 2845, 949,
950/Bang/2017, IT(TP)A Nos.374, 466/Bang/2013, 68, 205, 1299/Bang/2015,
IT(TP)A Nos. 69, 191/Bang/2014, 559, 881/Bang/2016, IT(TP)A No.387/Bang/2017
Page 331 of 331 purposes and IT(TP)A No.466/Bang/2013 is dismissed. In
Revenue's appeal, IT(TP)A No. 191/Bang/2014, No.205/Bang/2015, 881/Bang/2016
are partly allowed for statistical purposes and ITA No.1299/Bang/2015 is
allowed for statistical purposes.

Pronounced in the open court on 11th May, 2018.

    
    
                  Sd/-                                      Sd/-
          (INTURI RAMA RAO)                        (SUNIL KUMAR YADAV)
           Accountant Member                           Judicial Member
    
    Bangalore.
    Dated: 11th May, 2018.
    /NShylu/*
    
    
    Copy to:
     1. Appellants        2. Respondent
     3. CIT               4. Guard file
                                                           By order
    
    
                                                  Sr. Private Secretary,
                                                    ITAT, Bangalore.
     

