

Allahabad High Court

Manoj Alias Ghantoori vs Union Of India (Uoi) And Ors. on 27 February, 1998

Equivalent citations: 1998 CriLJ 4199

Author: N Gupta

Bench: G Tripathi, N Gupta

JUDGMENT N.S. Gupta, J.

1\. By means of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the pettioner Manoj alias Ghantoori has challenged the validity of detention
order dated 19-6-1997, passed by the then District Magistrate, Udham Singh
Nagar (Rudrapur), under Section 3/1 of the National Security Act.

2\. The grounds of detention upon which the subjective satisfaction of the
detaining authority viz the District Magistrate was based were as follows-

1) That the petitioner had actively participated along with his other
associates in Case Crime No. 376 of 1997, under Sections
147/148/149/307/452/323/506, I.P.C. and 7 of Criminal Law Amendment on 2-6-97
at about 8.30 A.M. and was responsible for committing heinous offence of gang
rape as also attempting to commit murder by forming an unlawful assembly in
the intervening night of 1/2, 6-97 at 9.00 P.M. in Kasba Kashipur.

2) That on the next day viz. 2-6-97, at about 8.30 P.M. in the night the
petitioner again visited the house of the complainant Ashok Kumar and
threatened him and the members of his family with dire consequences if he
deposed against him in the Court. The people of the Mohalla were terrorised.
They closed their doors and fell frightened so much so that some of the
Mohallawalas took shelter in the police station during night. The terror of
the petitioner was so grave that none could dare to open his mouth to narrate
the details of the incident.

3) That on 2-6-97, information was lodged at the police station that the
petitioner had pressurised the police officials to hush-up Case Crime No. 376
of 1997 registered against the petitioner.

4) That the petitioner had terrorised the doctors of the Government Hospital
to this extent that even they did not properly conduct the medical examination
of the victim Smt. Sampatti and her daughters Geeta and Kaushalya.

5) That on 20-10-90 at about 2.30 P.M. the petitioner along with his
associates attempted to commit murder of one Jadu by stabbing him in his
abdomen within the jurisdiction of police Station Kashipur.

6) That he terrorised the victims Jadu and his mother Sundari Devi to vacate
the house in which they were living as tenents by accepting a sum of Rs.
20,000/- from the landlord Kunj Behari for that purpose. This incident created
based to this extent that the entire population of Kasba Kashipur started
feeling insecure, giving rise to the disturbance of public order. The impact
of the terror created by the petitioner was so grave that nobody could dare to
give evidence against him. With the result that the petitioner was acquitted
in the said case being Case Crime No. 762 of 1990.

7) That on 8-7-91 at about 1.15 p.m. the petitioner along with his associates
was responsible for committing murders of Rajesh and Nasim s/o Abdul Aziz and
further attempted to commit murder of Mukhtar Husain by opening fire by means
of country made pistols. This incident also created terror amongst the people
and the people of the locaility started feeling insecure. This incident was
registered as Case Crime No. 695/91, under Section 302, I.P.C.

8) On 20-10-91 at about 9.45 P.M. the petitioner along with his other
associates committed the murder of one Shivraj Singh son of Maharaj Singh in
Mohalla Katoratal, when the deceased Rajesh along with his friends and others
was going to see the Ramlila. This incident also created terror in the
locality and was registered as Case Crime No. 1025 of 1991, under Section 302,
I.P.C. After proper investigation into the matter the police had submitted
proper chargesheet, but because of the terror of the petitioner the witnesses
did not depose against the petitioner and his associates, with the result that
the case had ended in acquittal.

9) That on 10-3-93 at about 8.00 A.M. the petitioner was arrested by Head
Constable Lekhpal Singh and constables Sukhbir Singh and Ram Pal Singh in
Girital Colony near the house of Kalwa and on his personal search a country
made pistol of 315 bore containing live cartridge there in was recovered,
about which incident the police has submitted chargesheet and the matter was
pending trial before the Court.

10) That on 21-5-93 at about 10.00 A.M. the petitioner along with his brother
Rajendra and Banti Jat went to the hotel of Rakesh Kumar for taking meals.
When the hotel manager demanded the charges, the petitioner threatened him
saying that his name was Manoj alias Ghantoori and that no hotelwala dares to
demand money from him. Thereafter a scuffle had followed in between the
petitioner and his associates on the one hand and Rajnish the hotel owner on
the other. The petitioner threatened Rajnish, the brother of the hotel owner
to kill and thereafter on 23-5-93 at about 9.00 p.m. the petitioner again went
to the said hotel where Rajnish was sitting on the counter and assaulted
Rajnish by means of a knife. When the servant of Rajnish came to his rescue he
too was pushed back. Rajnish was immediately taken to the hospital but was
declared dead. This incident was registered as Case Crime No. 624 of 93, under
Section 302, I.P.C. and after proper investigation into the matter the police
and submitted chargesheet.

11) That on 27-5-93 at about 4.00 p.m. the petitioner along with his
associates went to the main Bazar of Kasba Kashipur and threatened Dharmpal
Singh who was doing pairvi in Rajnish case to kill him by taking out a pistol.
The petitioner opened fire in air and went away. This incident also created
terror; the shop keepers shuttered down their shops and started running away.
Case Crime No. 636 of 1993, under Section 504/506, I.P.C. about this incident
was registered against him and was pending trial.

12) That on 29-5-93 the then sub-Inspector of Kashipur submitted a report
against the petitioner and his associates under Section 2/3 of U.P. Gangsters
and Antisocial Activities Act against the petitioner and his associates which
case was registered as Case Crime No. 64 of 1993 and was pending before the
Court.

13) That on 13-1-95 at about 7.30 p.m. the petitioner along with his
associates formed an unlawful assembly and in prosecution of the common object
of the said unlawful assembly the petitioner and his associate assaulted
Sanjai Kumar by means of knife, Danda and country made pistols, caused
injuries to him which case was registered as Case Crime No. 33 of 1995, under
Section 147/307, I.P.C. in which case too the police after proper
investigation submitted chargesheet and which case was pending trial.

14) That on 10-5-95 at 11.30 p.m. in front of a Tea Shop of Ram Pal near the
Court campus Kashipur the petitioner was apprehended by the Inspector P.N.
Singh and other police personnel and country made pistol of 12 bore and 12
live cartridges were recovered from his possession, about which case Crime No.
467 of 1995, under Section 25 Arms Act was registered against the petitioner
and was pending trial before the Court.

15) That on 14-7-95, the then Inspector Kotwali D.C. Rawat got Case Crime No.
690 of 1995 under Section 3/4 of U.P. Goonda Act registered against the
petitioner, because the petitioner was involved in antisocial activities in
Kasba Kashipur and was branded as a Goonda. After proper investigation of the
case the police submitted chargesheet and the case was pending trial.

16) That on 17-2-96 at about 10.00 p.m. the petitioner along with his
associates Balvinder Singh, Mahendra Singh, Jassa Singh, Gurusewak Singh,
Umesh Pahalwan and two others armed himself and his associates with guns and
country made pistols, Lathis and swords and went on four motorcycles to the
house of Nahar Singh, Nirmal Singh, Karnal Singh and threated to kill them
about which Case Crime No. 234 of 1996, under Sections
147/148/149/452/307/506, I.P.C. was registered against the petitioner and his
associates. After proper investigation into the matter, the police submitted
chargesheet in this case and the case was pending trial.

17) That on 31-8-96 at about 9.15 p.m. the petitioner and his associates
opened fire upon police party but was apprehended on Manpur Road and on his
personal search a country made pistol of 12 bore, containing an empty
cartridge and one live cartridge of 12 bore were recovered. The petitioner was
found carrying 3 Kg. doda of opium in a plastic bag about which Cases under
Section 307, I.P.C. 25 Arms Act and 18/20 of D.P.S. Act were registered
against the petitioner and were pending trial.

18) That in the intervening night of 31-8-96/1 -9-96 when the petitioner was
lodged in police lock-up of police station Kashipur along with his brother
Satish alias Mintoo, the petitioner started causing injuries to his person by
means of a water glass, with an intention to falsely rope in the police
officials about which Case Crime No. 800/96, under Section 309/306, I.P.C. was
registered against the petitioner and was pending trial.

19) That another case No. 308/97, under Section 3/4 of Gangsters Act was
registered against the petitioner.

The petitioner had challenged the aforesaid detention order on the following
grounds :-

i) That the detention order was vitiated for lack of application of mind by
the detaining authority.

ii) That the sponsoring authority suppressed the relevant materials from the
detaining authority and gave incorrect facts.

iii) That the police was feeling enmical towards the petitioner and at the
instance of the petitioner a Magisterial enquiry was also instituted against
the police officials.

iv) That proper compliance of provisions of Section 10 of the National
Security Act was not made. There was delay in the consideration and disposal
of the representation of the petitioner which caused prejudice to him.

v) That at the time of passing impugned detention order the petitioner was in
jail and no satisfaction was recorded by the detaining authority about the
urgency of his detention.

3\. Counter-affidavits in the case have been filed by Sri Mahesh Kumar Gupta,
the then District Magistrate Udham Singh Nagar, the detaining authority at the
relevant time who passed the impugned order of detention as also by Sri R.S.
Agarwal, Deputy Secretary Home and Sri Ram Bilas Jailor. Affidavit was also
filed by Sri Jitendra Kumar, Present District Magistrate of Udham Singh Nagar.

4\. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the
affidavits and counter-affidavits which were exchanged in between the parties.

5\. The detaining authority has reiterated in his counter-affidavit that
heinous offences one after the other were being committed by the petitioner
and his associates which created panic and terror in the mind of the public
and the impact of the criminal activities of the petitioner was so grave that
the public order was disturbed and the public of Kasba Kashipur had started
feeling insecures. The number of incidents given above regarding criminal
history of the petitioner fully prove prima facie the involvement of the
petitioner in heinous offences like rape, murder and attempt to murder etc.

6\. It was argued on behalf of the petitioner that since the petitioner was
acquitted in the various cases of murder and attempt to murder instituted
against him, this Court should believe that the petitioner was innocent and
was falsely roped in into a number of criminal cases maliciously by the
police. It is not possible for us to appreciate the arguments advanced by the
learned counsel for the petitioner for the simple reason that the copies of
judgments of the Courts which were filed by the petitioner himself relating to
incident dated 12-10-91, regarding the murder of Shiv Raj Singh go to show
that all the three witnesses of fact had turned hostile. In other incident
dated 20-5-92, relating to the murder of Rajnish, the case ended in acquittal
because of the fact that the witnesses of fact failed to suport the
prosecution theory. The third case relating to the incident of 13-1-95 under
Setions 147/148/307/149, I.P.C. in which Hemant Kumar Sharma was injured had
also ended in `cquittal because the prosecution witnesses including the
injured did not support the prosecution story.

7\. The circumstances that the witnesses of heinous cases like that of murder
and attempt to murder turned hostile before the trial Court by itself go to
show that the terror of the petitioner was so much that no witness was
prepared to state anything before the trial Court against the petitioner; that
by itself goes to suggest that the people were feeling frightened and scared
by the criminal activities of the petitioner. It is clear from the affidavit
filed by the detaining authority that after perusing all the relevant
materials which were duly placed before him, he had passed the imugned order
of detention. Thus the ground that the detaining authority did not apply its
mind to the materials relating to the activities of the petitioner before
arriving at subjective satisfaction is absolutely unfounded.

8\. Sri Manoj Misra, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that no
reference about the report of the Local Intelligence Unit was made by the
detaining authority in the impugned order that the impugned order was based
upon extraneous considerations; but we are unable to agree with the
submissions for the reason that there is nothing in the report of the L.I.U.
which may go to suggest that the petitioner did not indulge into various
criminal activities Rather the said report also goes to suggest that because
of the terror created by the petitioner the people of the locality were not
going to open their mouths against the petitioner. The mere fact that at the
time of passing impugned order the petitioner was in jail is no ground to
vitiate the impugned order of detention. Application for bail can be given at
any time as a matter of right.

9\. Sri Manoj Misra, learned counsel for the petitioner, relying upon the
proposition of law laid down in AIR 1989 SC 491, has argued that since the
petitioner was inside jail the possibility of his coining out of jail was non-
existent. The detaining authority while passing the impugned order of
detention failed to consider that important aspect of the matter and,
therefore, the detention order was liable to be quashed.

10\. Another ruling relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner was
A.K. Roy v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1982 SC 710. On the basis of this
ruling too the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the report of
L.I.U. was an extraneous matter which was not referred to in the ground of
detention order and it may have influenced the mind of detaining authority and
hence the order was vitiated.

11\. On the other hand Sri Mahendra Pratap A.G.A. relied upon the ruling of
Kamariinnissa v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1991 SC 1640 in which their
lordships of the Supreme Court laid down the following guidelines which arc
reproduced as under (para 13):-

From the catena of decisions referred to above it seems clear to us that even
in the case of a person in custody the detention order can validly be passed
(I) if the authority passing the order is aware of the fact that he is
actually in custody; (2) if he has reasons to believe on the basis of reliable
material placed before him (a) that there is a real possibility of his being
released on bail and (b) that on being so released he would in all probability
indulge in prejudicial activities and (3) if it is felt essential to detain
him to prevent him from so doing. If the authority passes an order after
recording his satisfaction in this behalf, such an order cannot be struck down
on the ground that the proper course for the authority was to oppose the bail
and if bail is granted notwithstanding such opposition to question it before a
higher Court. What this Court stated in the case of Ramesh Yadav AIR 1986 SC
315 (supra) was that ordinarily a detention order should not be passed merely
to pre-empt or circumvent enlargement on bail in cases which are essentially
criminal in nature and can be dealt with under the ordinary law. It seems to
us well settled that even, in a case where a person is in custody, if the
facts and circumstances of the case so demand, resort can be had to the law of
preventive detention. This seems to be quite clear from the case law discussed
above and there is no need to refer to the High Court decisions to which our
attention was drawn since they do not hold otherwise. We, therefore, find if
difficult to accept the contention of the counsel for the petitioners that
there was no valid and compelling reason for passing the impugned orders of
detention because the detenus were in custody.

12\. In 1994 SCC (Cri) 1325 : (AIR 1994 SC 2179), Attorney General for India
v. Amratlal Prajivandas the provisions of Section 5A of National Security Act
came up for consideration before the Bench of Hon'ble Nine Judges of the Apex
Court in which their lordships had observed in paragraph 48 (of SCC) : (para
47 of AIR) as follows :-

Now, it is beyond dispute that an order of detention can be based upon one
single ground. Several decisions of this Court have held that even one
prejudicial act can be treated as sufficient for forming the requisite
satisfaction for detaining the person. In Debu Mahato v. State of W.B. AIR
1974 SC 816) it was observed that while ordinarily-speaking one act may not be
sufficient to form the requisite satisfaction, there is no such invariable
rule and that in a given case one act may suffice. That was a case of
wagonbreaking and having regard to the nature of the Act, it was held that one
act is sufficient. The same principle was reiterated in Anil Dey v. State of
W.B. AIR 1974 SC 832. It was a case of railway signal material. Here too one
act was held to be sufficient. Similarly in Lsrail S.K. v. District Magistrate
of West Dinajpur AIR 1975 SC 168 and Dharua Kanu v. State of W.B. AIR 1975 SC
571, single act of theft of telegraph copper wires in huge quantity and
removal of railway fishplates respectively was held sufficient to sustain the
order of detention. In Saraswathi Seshagiri v. State of Kerala AIR 1982 SC
1162), a case arising under COFEPOSA, a single act viz. attempt to export a
huge amount of Indian currency was held sufficient. In short, the principle
appears to be this, Though ordinarily one act may not be held sufficient to
sustain an order of detention, one act may sustain an order of detention if
the act is of such a nature as to indicate that it is an organised act or a
manifestation of organised activity. The gravity and nature of the act is also
relevant. The test is whether the act is such that it gives rise to an
inference that the person would continue to indulge in similar prejudicial
activity. That is the reason why single acts of wagon breaking, theft of
single material, theft of telegraph copper wires in huge quantity and removal
of railway fishplates were held sufficient. Similarly, where the person tried
to export huge amount of Indian currency to a foreign country in a planned and
premeditated manner, it was held that such single act warrants an inferennce
that he will repeat his activity in future and, therefore his detention is
necessary to prevent him from indulging insuch prejudicial activity. If one
looks at the acts the COFEPOSA is designed to prevent, they are all either
acts of smuggling or of foreign exchange manipulation. These acts are indulged
in by persons, who act in concert with other persons and quite often such
activity has international ramifications. These acts are preceded by a good
amount of planning the organisation. They are not like ordinary law and order
crimes. If, however, in any given case a single act is found to be not
sufficient to sustain the order of detention that may well be quashed but it
cannot be stated as a principle that one single act cannot constitute the
basis for detention. On the contrary, it does. In other words, it is not
necessary that there should be multiplicity of grounds for making or
sustaining an order of detention.

13\. Judging the present case in the back-drop of the two cases relied upon by
the learned counsel for the State, we are of the opinion that criminal
activities of the petitioner which were of heinous nature, though in some of
which the petitioner was ultimiately acquited and the fact of acquittal was
not brought to the notice of the detaining authority and the detaining
authority was only apprised that the said cases were pending, we are of the
opinion that no prejudice was caused to the detenu for the simple reason that
the very involvement of the petitioner in the number of cases complained
against the petitioner afforded sufficient grounds for the subjective
satisfaction of the detaining authority to excercise his powers under Section
3/1 of the National Security Act.

14\. It is clear from the affidavit of Sri R.S. Agarwal, Deputy Secretary Home
that the petitioner's representation dated 4-7-97 against the impugned order
of detention was received by the state on 10-7-97, 12-7-97 and 13-7-97 were
holidays on account of second Saturday and Sunday. The State Government placed
the said representation along with necessary comments of the detaining
authority before the Advisory Board on 14-7-97, which after the report of the
Advisory Board was again examined by the State Government and was finally
rejected on 17-7-97. The Central Government also rejected the petitioner's
representation which fact was duly conveyed to the petitioner vide FAX message
D/- 28-8-97. It would thus be seen that there was no undue delay in the
consideration and disposal of the petitioner's representation on the part of
the State Government or the Central Government.

15\. Thus, to sum up, we find that the subjective satisfaction of the
detaining authority regarding the involvement of the petitioner in criminal
activities was prowess based and was of such a magnitute as to disturbe public
order and hence it was proper one. We accordingly find no force in this
petition, which is hereby dismissed.

