

Bombay High Court

Lupin Ltd vs Johnson And Johnson on 23 December, 2014

    
    
          Uday                                                           AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
                 IN THE HIGH COURT OF  JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                      ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
    
    
    
    
                                                                               
                      NOTICE OF MOTION (L) NO. 2178 OF 2012
                                        IN 
    
    
    
    
                                                       
                             SUIT (L) NO.1842 OF 2012
    
         LUPIN LTD.                                       ..  PLAINTIFF
              V/S
    
    
    
    
                                                      
         JOHNSON AND JOHNSON                               ..  DEFENDANT
    
                                         ALONGWITH
    
    
    
    
                                          
                              APPEAL (L) NO.674 OF 2012
                            ig               IN 
                        NOTICE OF MOTION NO.1533 OF 2012
                                              IN
                                 SUIT NO.1171 OF 2012
                          
         SHAKTI BHOG FOODS LIMITED                           ..  APPELLANT
               V/S
         PARLE PRODCUTS PRIVATE LIMITED         .. RESPONDENT
                                              ....
          
    
    
         Dr.Virendra   V.Tulzapurkar,   Sr.Advocate   with   Mr.Virag   Tulzapurkar, 
         Sr.Advocate,   Mr.Amit   Jamsandekar,   Mr.Vinay   G.Parelkar,   Mrs.Alka 
       
    
    
    
         Parelkar,   Ms.Tanvi   Kalelkar,   Ms.Esha   Trivedi,   Ms.Neha   Naik   i/b 
         V.A.Associates for plaintiff in Suit (L) No.1842 of 2012.
    
    
    
    
    
         Mr.   Ravi   Kadam,   Sr.   Advocate   with   Mr.Venkatesh   Dhond, 
         Sr.Advocate,   Mr.   Rashmin   Khadekar,   Mr.Alankar   Kirpekar, 
         Mr.Muralidhar Khandilkar, Mr.Deepak Gogia, Mr.Gautam Panchal i/b 
         MAG Legal for defendant in Suit (L) No.1842 of 2012.
          
    
    
    
    
    
         Mr.Venkatesh   Dhond,   Sr.Advocate   with   Mr.Rashmin   Khandekar, 
         Mr.M.K.Miglani,   Mr.Vinod   Bhagat,   Mr.Gaurav   Miglani,   Mr.Dhiren 
         Karania   and   Mr.Purit   Jain   i/b   G.S.Hegde   and   V.A.Bhagat   for 
         appellant in Appeal (L) No.674 of 2012.
    
         Dr.V.V.Tulzapurkar,   Sr.Advocate   with   Mr.M.R.Nair,   Mr.R.H.Gajria, 
         Ms.Deepa   Hate   i/b   Gajaria   &   Co.   for   respondent   in   Appeal   (L) 
         No.674 of 2012.
    
                                                                                                1
    
    
    
                                                       ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::
           Uday                                                                AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
                                               CORAM : MOHIT S. SHAH, C.J.,
                                                          S.J.KATHAWALLA &
    
    
    
    
                                                                                    
                                                          N.M.JAMDAR, JJ.
                                              Date of Reserving     )
    
    
    
    
                                                            
                                              the Judgment.          ) : 25.07.2014
    
                                             Date of Pronouncing)
                                             the Judgment.          ): 23.12.2014 
    
    
    
    
                                                           
                        
         JUDGMENT (Per Chief Justice)
    

This reference has been made to the Full Bench pursuant to the order dated 13
August 2012 of learned Single Judge of this Court (Coram : B.R.Gavai,J.) for
considering following question of law:

> "Whether the Court can go into the question of the validity of the
> registration of the plaintiff's trade mark at an interlocutory stage when
> the defendant takes up the defence of invalidity of the registration of the
> plaintiff's trade mark in an infringement suit?"

2\. The learned Single Judge felt the need to make this reference in view of
two decisions of the Division Benches of this Court, one holding that the
Court can not go into the question of validity of registration of a trade mark
when such defence is taken by the defendant at an interlocutory stage in a
suit for infringement of registered trade mark (judgment dated 16 February
2005 in M/s.Maxheal Pharmaceuticles v/s. Shalina Laboratories Pvt.Ltd. -
Appeal No.88 of 2005 in N.M.No.2663 of 2004 in suit No.2663 of 2004) and the
other decision in which the Court considered the  2 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:22 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D validity of
registration when such a defence was raised at an interlocutory stage
(J.K.sons v/s. Parksons Games & Sports & anr.

2011 (47) PTC 443 (Bom).

The conflict also appears in a series of judgments of this Court on the one
hand holding that at an interlocutory stage the Court cannot go into the
question of validity of registration of the plaintiff's trade mark when such
defence is raised by the defendant in an interlocutory stage and a series of
judgments of Delhi High Court on the other hand holding that such a plea can
be considered at an interlocutory stage.

3\. Looking to the length of the judgment, we would like to indicate its broad
framework as under:

    
    
                  Para nos.                P a r t i c u l a r s
    
                  3 to 5            Facts.
    
    
    
    
    
                  6                 Reasons - ordering reference.
                  7                 Plaintiff's submissions.
                  8                 Defendant's submissions.
                  9                 Plaintiff's rejoinder.
    
    
    
    
    
                  10 to 16          Statutory provisions.
                  17 to 23          Legislative History.
                  24 to 43          Discussion.
                  44 to 54          Case law.
                  55 to 57          Further discussion.
                  59                Conclusions.
    
                                                                                                       3
    
    
    
                                                              ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::
           Uday                                                                  AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
                                                   FACTS
    
    
    
    
                                                                                      
    

4\. Before proceeding to consider the rival submissions, we may first set out
facts leading to filing of the two suits and the notice of motion giving rise
to this reference.

(i) Suit (L) No. 1842 of 2012 has been filed by Lupin Limited, which is a
company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 and has its registered
office in Mumbai. The plaintiff carries on business of manufacturing,
marketing and selling pharmaceutical products and claims to be amongst top
five in the Indian pharmaceutical market. The plaintiff also claims
international presence in almost 70 countries.

(ii) The defendant is a company having its registered office in New Jersey,
USA and is also in the business of manufacturing and selling of pharmaceutical
products.

(iii) The suit has been filed for infringement in respect of registered trade
mark "LUCYNTA" registered in Class 5 of the Fourth Schedule to the Trade Marks
Act with effect from 2012. The plaintiff claims that it had conceived and
adopted its mark "LUCYNTA" in or around June 2010 and applied for registration
of the same on 20 August 2010. The plaintiff took official search of the Trade
Marks Register in the Trade Marks Registry on 18 October 2010 and found no
conflicting mark on the Register of Trade Marks or pending application.

4 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                             AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
               (iv)    On 28 March 2011, the Examiner of Trade Marks issued 
    
    
    
    
                                                                                 
    

an Examination Report that no mark conflicting to the plaintiff's mark was
reflected.

(v) On 8 August 2011, the trade mark was advertised in the Trade Marks Journal
and thereafter the trade mark was registered by the Registrar of Trade Marks
under certificate of registration and the trade mark "LUCYNTA" was put on the
Register of Trade Marks on 9 March 2012.

(vi) According to the plaintiff, it launched its product's trade mark
"LUCYNTA" in market in October 2011.

(vii) On 12 July 2012, the plaintiff received summons of the proceedings of
Suit No. 1931 of 2012 filed by Johnson & Johnson (defendant in the present
suit) against the present plaintiff (Lupin Limited) alleging that the
plaintiff is committing the act of passing off by using the mark "LUCYNTA".
The said suit was filed in the Delhi High Court on 4 July 2012. The plaintiff
has contended that the application for registration of the mark "LUCYNTA" made
by Johnson & Johnson (the defendant) in India was made on 2 September 2011,
which is subsequent in time to the application made by the plaintiff. The
plaintiff has already got the trade mark "LUCYNTA" registered in its name.

(viii) Johnson & Johnson (the defendant) has contended in the suit that -

5 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

(a) the defendant was the inventor of a new drug viz. TAPENTADOL, and was not
only the first to coin and adopt a distinctive trade mark viz., 'NUCYNTA' in
respect thereof, but the defendant had extensively used the same in the
international market since 2008;

(b) prior to the plaintiff's registration, the defendant had also obtained
registration thereof in various countries around the world;

(c) the plaintiff, before this Court had therefore fraudulently adopted a
deceptively similar mark LUCYNTA, that too, in respect of the same drug and
such a fraudulent adoption had proceeded to registration;

(d) the defendant before this Court had also prior to the filing of the
infringement action by the plaintiff in this Court, filed a suit in respect of
passing off against the plaintiff in the Delhi High Court. In retaliation the
plaintiff herein had filed its action;

(e) the adoption by the plaintiff of its mark "LUCYNTA" was ex facie
fraudulent and the suit filed by the plaintiff Lupin Limited was mala fide.

(ix) Johnson & Johnson (the defendant) contended that the case exemplified a
situation where:

6 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

(a) a pirator / copier was attempting to restrain the original adopter merely
because he had secured registration of the mark wrongly and/or fraudulently;
and

(b) despite doing so, the pirator/copier was bold enough to assert that the
Court was powerless in the matter and could not examine the obvious fraudulent
nature of the mark and was duty bound to enforce the same merely because "the
Registrar had granted registration".

5\. The other appeal arises from the suit filed by Parle Products Limited to
enforce its rights in respect of its trade mark "GLUCO" registered in Class 30
of the Trade Marks Act. The defendant - Shakti Bhog Foods Limited contended
that the mark "GLUCO" was descriptive and no one could have monopoly over the
same as held by the Supreme Court in Corn Products Refining Company vs.
Shangrila Food Products Limited1. The defendant also pointed out that the
plaintiff had filed a suit in the Madras High Court in respect of the same
mark "GLUCO" against Bakeman Industries Ltd. and the Madras High Court
examined the objection about validity of the registration and refused to grant
interim relief in favour of the plaintiff - Parle Products Limited. The
defendant, therefore, contended that in such a situation the Supreme Court has
1 AIR 1960 SC 142  7 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D held that the mark "GLUCO" was descriptive and no
one could have monopoly over the same. The plaintiff cannot be allowed to
contend that the application for injunction must be heard and decided on the
basis that the Court cannot examine prima facie validity of registration at
the stage of hearing the injunction application.

6\. The learned Single Judge (B.R.Gavai,J.) in the order of reference has in
paragraphs 15 and 16 of the judgment dated 13th August, 2012 in Notice of
Motion (L) No.2178 of 2012 observed thus :

> "15. It can be seen that the Division bench in M/s. Maxheal Pharmaceuticals
> v. Shalina Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (supra) held that once the registration is
> granted in favour of the proprietor, he is entitled to an order of
> injunction restraining the others from using the same even if the same is
> wrongly granted. It further held that it is not the practice of this Court
> to go into the question of validity of the registration at the stage of
> grant of injunction. However, the Division Bench of this Court in M/s. J.K.
> Sons v. M/s. Parksons Games & Sports (supra), relying on the judgment of the
> Full bench of this Court in the case of Abdul Cadur Allibhoy v.

Moahomedally Hyderally (supra), has held that the principle that a person who
himself has imitated somebody else's mark and guilty of false and misleading
representation is not entitled to an injunction, is applicable to the cases of
infringement of trademark and passing off. In view of the law laid down by the
Apex Court, as  8 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D discussed hereinabove, there should be no difficulty
in so far as action for passing off is concerned. It appears to be a settled
position of law that an action for passing off would lie at the instance of
prior user even against the registered user. The difficulty would be in
respect of action for infringement of trademark, inasmuch as in view of the
judgment of the Division Bench in the case of M/s. Maxheal Pharmaceuticals v.
Shalina Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (supra), a proprietor plaintiff can claim an
injunction even against a prior user, on the action of infringement, merely on
the basis of having registration in his favour. In my respectful view, this
would lead to anomalous situation. If an action for passing off is by a prior
user, the Court would be permitted to go into the issues including the issue
of validity of registration of the defendant's trademark and even grant an
order of injunction in favour of the person whose mark is not registered and
against the person whose mark is registered. However, if an injunction is
sought by a proprietor of a registered trademark, in view of the view taken by
the Division Bench of this Court in the case of M/s.

Maxheal Pharmaceuticals v. Shalina Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (supra), the Court
would be powerless to go into the question of validity or otherwise of the
plaintiff's registration and will have to grant an injunction merely for
asking. In view of the view taken by the Division Bench, which binds the
learned single Judges of this Court, this Court would be bound by the said
judgment to grant injunction in favour of the plaintiff, who is registered
proprietor, even if this Court finds that the adoption of the plaintiff's
trademark is fraudulent or deceptive.

9 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

16\. The effect on the Indian economy of the liberalization, privatization and
globalisation cannot be totally ignored. At the same time, it also cannot be
ignored that due to technological advancement, the information and knowledge
worldwide is available at the flick of a second. Knowledge and awareness of
the goods of the foreign traders and trademarks would be available in India
immediately after the launching thereof and vice versa by use of internet. It
is common knowledge that the medical practitioners and experts surf on
internet to find out the latest drugs available. The possibility cannot be
ruled out of a local manufacturer coming to know about the product launched
overseas and by imitating it immediately getting it registered in his favour.

Whether, even in such a case, the courts would be precluded from considering
the question of validity of registration and would be forced to grant an order
of injunction in favour of the registered proprietor of the trademark merely
on the ground that the Court cannot go into the question of validity of
registration as long as the mark remains on the register (even wrongly) ? In
view of the judgment of the Division Bench in the case of M/s.

Maxheal Pharmaceuticals v. Shalina Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (supra), the courts
would be bound to grant injunction in favour of the registered proprietor. The
important factor which has been directed to be taken into consideration in
such matters by the Apex Court in the case of Cadila Health Care Ltd. v.
Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd., 2001 PTC 300 (SC) of ensuring public interest
will have to be given go bye, if the injunction is to be granted in favour of
such fraudulent and deceptive registered user of trademark."

10 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D SUBMISSIONS FOR THE APPELLANT/ PLAINTIFF.

7\. Dr.Virendra Tulzapurkar, learned senior counsel for the appellant-
plaintiff made the following broad submissions:

(a) The consideration of the plea of invalidity of the registration is
contrary to the object of the Trade Marks Act. If the Court trying an
infringement suit, at an interlocutory stage considers the plea of invalidity
of the Plaintiff's registration of the mark, it will result in defeating the
object of registration sought to be achieved by the Act. The entire object of
providing for registration of a trademark and recognizing the exclusive right
of the registered proprietor to use the registered trademark and conferring a
right on the registered proprietor to prevent others from using an identical
or deceptively similar trademark, is to obviate the necessity of proving in
each and every case the Plaintiff's title to the mark i.e. Plaintiff's
proprietorship of the mark, the distinctiveness of the mark and its
reputation.

(b) Consideration of the plea of invalidity of registration by the District
Court at an interim stage in an infringement suit is barred by the provisions
of the Act and the scheme of the Act.

11 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
         (i)           The scheme of the Act is that exclusive jurisdiction   is 
    
    
    
    
                                                                                    
    

conferred on the Registrar/ Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB) to
decide the question of validity of the registration of a registered trademark
and that too only if an application for rectification is filed under Section
57 of the Act.

(ii) The entire scheme of the Act and, in particular, the provisions of
Sections 28, 31, 57, 93, 100, 124 and 125 make it clear that the question of
validity of the registration of a registered trademark can not be decided by a
Court at all at any stage of a suit and that question is required to be and
can be decided only by the Registrar or the IPAB who alone have the
jurisdiction to do so. If the jurisdiction of the Court is completely ousted
to decide the question of validity of registration, even at the final stage of
the infringement action, a fortiori, the jurisdiction of the Court to consider
the question of validity of registration of the registered trademark at a
prima facie stage is ousted. This is also supported by a principle analogous
to the principle that an interlocutory relief that can be granted by a Court
must be germane to the main relief and only as an aid to the final relief that
can be granted and the Court cannot grant any interlocutory relief which it
cannot grant as final relief.

(iii) It is clear from a combined reading of sections 28, 31, 124 and 125 that
the legislature did not intend that a civil court trying an infringement
action should consider the plea of invalidity of  12 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:22 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D registration at any
stage. Section 28 confers an exclusive right on the registered proprietor to
use the mark and also to prevent others from using an identical or deceptively
similar mark. These rights arise on registration. The rights subsist so long
as the registration is valid and , as stated above, the registration remains
valid till the mark is expunged in rectification proceedings.

(iv) The presence of the words "if valid" in Section 28 of the Act does not in
any manner indicate that the legislature intended that the civil Court should
consider the question of validity of registration in a suit for infringement,
but legislative intent is only to allow the Defendant to raise the defense of
invalidity which if and only if accepted in rectification proceedings by the
appropriate forum (which is not the Civil Court trying the suit), would result
in rejecting the claim of the Plaintiff for injunction and other reliefs in
the infringement suit.

(v) Section 28 of the Act does not provide for any independent or separate
defense being raised by the Defendant in the infringement action. All defenses
available in law have been codified and those are to be found in sections
33,34, 35 and 36 of the Act.

Reliefs in an infringement action are not granted under Section 28 but are
granted under Section 135 of the Act and Section 28 only recognizes the rights
on the basis of which reliefs can be granted in an infringement action.

13 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:22 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
         (vi)           The plea of invalidity of registration of trademark and 
    

the plea/defence that the Defendant's use of a mark does not amount to
infringement in view of the provisions of Section 35, are two distinct and
independent pleas. When the Court allows the defense that the Defendant' s use
of a word is in a descriptive sense and not as a trade mark and therefore
cannot amount to infringement this does not mean that the Court allows the
plea of invalidity being raised on the ground that the Plaintiffs mark ought
not to be registered in view of the provisions of Section 35 of the Act. In
fact a contention under section 35 is only a defense and is not a contention
touching the registration or affecting the validity of registration at all.
Allowing a defense under section 35 does not affect or touch the registration
of the trade mark. If, however, the Defendant uses the word in a trademark
sense, then the Court will grant injunction on the ground that it infringes
the Plaintiffs registered trademark.

(vii) The provisions of Section 31 of the Act read in conjunction with
Sections 28 and 124 clearly show that till the mark is rectified there is a
presumption in law as to validity of the registration of the mark. The words
prima facie in Section 31 are required to be construed in the context of the
object of registration, the object of the Act and the provision conferring
exclusive jurisdiction of the appropriate forum (which is not the civil court
trying the infringement action) to decide the question of validity of the
registration of the registered trade mark. It is submitted that two  14 :::
Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D objects
are achieved by Section 31, first, it facilitates proof of title to the mark,
and Second, it throws the burden on the Applicant seeking to invalidate the
registration as regards the rectification proceedings. The words of the
Section "prima facie valid" show that so long as the mark is on the register
and till it is not expunged by the appropriate authority (which is not the
civil court) the registration must be considered as valid. This dual objective
is noted by the Supreme Court in the case of National Bell Company V. Metal
Goods Manufacturing Company Private Limited AIR 1971 SC 898, at para 8 in the
following words:-

> 'Under Section 31, registration is prima facie evidence of its validity. The
> object of the Section is obviously to facilitate the proof of title by a
> Plaintiff suing for infringement of his trademark. He has only to produce
> the certificate of registration of his trademark and that would be prima
> facie evidence of his title.

Such registration is prima facie evidence also in the rectification
applications under Section 56 which means that onus of proof is on the person
making such application.' Therefore the said presumption operates at all times
from the date of registration till the registration is cancelled and there is
no question of the said presumption being rebutted at any time prior to the
final decision of the appropriate forum (which is not the civil court trying
infringement action) expunging the mark from the register on the ground of
invalidity.

15 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

(viii) The IPAB or the Registrar has no power to grant any interim relief in a
rectification application. (who are the authorities with exclusive
jurisdiction to consider the validity of registration) The IPAB has power to
grant interim relief only in the proceedings by way of appeal against the
decision of the Registrar in the matter of applications for registration.
Thus, the legislature did not intend that the registration once granted after
following the procedure prescribed by the Act, be stayed or the effect of
registration be suspended at any stage in the proceedings for rectification.
It is therefore, clear that, the legislature did not want even authority,
which is vested with exclusive jurisdiction to decide on the question of
invalidity, to pass any order before finally deciding the question of
validity, which can have the effect of staying or suspending the rights
conferred by registration. Much less should the Civil Court, which has no
jurisdiction at all to consider the question of validity, have power to
consider that question at an interlocutory stage and to pass an order which
will have the effect, though tentatively or for the time being i.e. during the
pendency of the rectification proceedings, of staying the effect of
registration which was granted after following the procedure prescribed by the
Act. Therefore such a plea of invalidity cannot be raised at any interlocutory
stage.

Otherwise it will result in an incongruous position emerging as a result of
the Civil Court at an interlocutory stage, accepting the plea of invalidity,
whereas the IPAB cannot do so. Any interpretation producing absurd result
should be avoided.

16 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                           AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
         (c)           The provisions of the Designs Act, 2000 and the Patents 
    

Act also need to be referred to. These Acts (unlike the Trade Marks Act)
contain express provisions permitting the Defendant in an action for
infringement of copyright in a design and for infringement of patent to raise
the plea of invalidity of registration of design/grant of patent.

(i) Section 22(4) of the Designs Act, 2000 expressly provides that in a suit
for infringement of copyright in a registered design, the Defendants can raise
by way of defense a plea which can be taken under Section 19 for cancellation
of a design. Section 19 of the Designs Act 2000 sets out the grounds on which
a design can be cancelled. It is to be noted that in the earlier Act i.e. the
Designs Act, 1911, there was no such provision. However, the Courts, while
interpreting the provisions of the Designs Act 1911, held that such a plea can
be taken in a suit for infringement of a registered design. In Section 22 (3)
of the Designs Act 2000, it is provided that in any suit or any other
proceedings for relief under Section 22, every ground on which the
registration of a design may be cancelled under Section 19 shall be available
as a ground of defense.

(ii) Section 107 of the Patents Act 1970 provides that in any suit for
infringement of a patent, every ground on which the patent may be revoked
under Section 64 shall be available as a ground of defense. Section 64
provides for the grounds on which a patent can be revoked.

17 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                               AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
         (iii)      It   is   thus   clear   that   the   legislature,   when   it   so   wanted, 
    
    
    
    
                                                                                   
         consciously   enacted     statutory   provisions     that   in   a   suit   for 
    
    
    
    
                                                           
         infringement   of   patent   or   infringement   of   a   registered   design,     a 
    

defense in the suit itself could be taken which would be decided by the Court
trying the suit. The Legislature was fully aware of the provisions of the
Patents Act, 1970 and the Designs Act of 2000 and consciously made a departure
therefrom while enacting the Trade Marks Act. In respect of registered Trade
Marks, the Legislature did not want only a limited/ restricted, presumption as
regards the evidence of the entries in the register, but wanted the
presumption of the validity of the registration of the mark itself. This was
solely with the purpose of carrying out the object of registration of a
trademark viz. to obviate the production of evidence of title, reputation and
distinctiveness of the registered trademark in every case. The title and the
distinctiveness were intended to be presumed to have been established by the
production of the registration certificate and which presumption could be
rebutted only when the mark was rectified by the appropriate authority having
jurisdiction to try rectification proceedings (and not by the Court trying the
suit for infringement).

(iv) In the Patents Act and the Designs Act there is no provision similar to
the provision contained in Section 31(1) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999. This is
one more instance to show that the legislature did not intend that the
question of validity of registration of Trade Mark  18 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D be considered by the
Court in a suit for infringement of a registered trademark at any stage of the
suit proceedings, much less at an interlocutory stage.

(d) Therefore the aforesaid provisions clearly show that the legislature never
intended that the Court trying an infringement action on a registered trade
mark could or should consider or decide the question of validity of the
registration of a registered trade mark, nor did it intend that such a plea
could be allowed to be raised at an interlocutory stage. The provisions of the
Act are required to be interpreted in such a manner that the objects of the
Act are fulfilled. Accepting the view that the plea of invalidity can be
raised in an infringement action will result in destroying what was granted by
the Act by providing for registration and will amount to putting the clock
back to pre-1875 position. If such a plea is allowed to be taken at the
interlocutory stage in an infringement action, the effect of registration will
stand destroyed and there will not be any difference between a suit for
infringement of a trademark and a suit for passing off. Various Courts,
including the Supreme Court have held that the two actions (one for the
infringement and the other for passing off ) are different.

19 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RESPONDENTS-DEFENDANTS

8\. On the other hand, Mr.Ravi Kadam and Mr.Dhond, learned senior counsel for
the defendants made the following submissions:

(a) The real question which falls for determination and/or consideration by
the Full Bench is not whether the Court can in an infringement action, at the
interlocutory stage, go behind the registration of the trade mark, but:

(i) Whether the obvious invalidity and/or unregistrability and/or fraudulent
nature of registration, granted by the Trade Mark Registry is a factor which
is completely irrelevant to an enquiry by a Court at the stage of grant of
interlocutory relief?

(ii) Whether even in cases where the Court is convinced, ex-

facie and/or without embarking upon any involved factual inquiry, that the
registration granted is totally illegal or fraudulent or something which the
Court regards as being unconscionable, the Court hearing an interlocutory
application is bound to disregard its own assessment and proceed to grant an
injunction to enforce a trade mark, whose registration it regards as being a
matter of substantial disquiet?

(iii) There is no express statutory bar against a Defendant in an infringement
action raising at an interlocutory stage, defence of invalidity of the
registration nor is there any bar to the Court considering such defence, at
the interlocutory stage.

20 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

(iv) There is not even any implied bar under the Act from either the defendant
raising such a defence or the Court considering such a defence, if so raised.

(v) On the contrary, the clear language of the Act and the statutory scheme
not only recognises that, at an interlocutory stage, the defendant can raise
and the Court can consider, objections about the invalidity of the
registration, but, in fact obliges the Court to examine the same.

(b) The basic principle of statutory interpretation is of literal
construction. The words of the statute will have to be read as it is, unless
they lead to absurdity. It is only in such contingency, recourse to external
aid is permissible.

(i) Section 28 states that registration of a trade mark, if valid, gives
registered proprietor of the trade mark exclusive right to use the trade mark.

(ii) Section 31 states that in all legal proceedings relating to trade mark,
the registration shall be a prima facie evidence of the validity. The
reference to the legal proceedings in sections 31 and 57 will also mean a suit
for enforcement. There is no reason to read legal proceedings in a restrictive
manner.

21 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

(iii) Section 57 deals with the power to set aside registration and rectify
the register, by the Tribunal.

(iv) Section 124 deals with stay of the proceedings where validity of the
registration is questioned.

(v) Section 124(5) states that Court is not precluded from passing an
interlocutory order.

The plain reading of these sections shows that registration of the trade mark
gives a right for its enforcement. The registration of trade mark will be
prima facie evidence of its validity and when registration is questioned
before the Tribunal, though the Court will stay the proceedings, the Court has
a power to pass interim orders.

(c) A conjoint reading of these sections, read as it is, would show that a
right flows only if the trade mark is valid and the act of registration is a
prima facie proof of its validity.

(d) If it is to be held that the Court is powerless to refuse any interim
order when trade mark is registered, the words of the statute will have to be
re-written to the effect that the registration of trade mark is "conclusive
proof" of its validity and/or once a trade mark is registered, till it is set
aside, no Court shall have any power to question its registration.

22 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Thus either the words "if valid" and "prima
facie" will have to be omitted from these sections or be deemed to read as,
"valid" and "conclusive". Thus, by process of interpretation, the statute will
have to be re-enacted, which is not permissible unless the plain reading leads
to absurdity or is not what is plainly intended by the legislation.

(e) The Act of 1958 was preceded by the Act of 1940, which contained the words
"if valid". An amendment was moved to the 1940 Act to delete the words "if
valid". A legislative intent can be gathered from the notes and the clause
which stated that it sought to omit the words "if valid" so as to bar any
Court to go into a question of validity of registration. Under the Act of
1958, the words "if valid" were introduced again. The legislative intent is
clear that the words "if valid" are referable to the Court enforcing the
registration. Thus it cannot be said that the words "if valid" and "prima
facie" are superfluous. They are meant to grant power to the Court to examine
validity of the registration.

(f) However, once registration is granted, it is desirable that the holder
thereof should continue to exercise its right till the registration is set
aside without having to face legal hurdles in enforcement. Though the words
"prima facie", "valid" are used, the registration of trade mark will have to
be taken as a very strong evidence in favour of the validity.

23 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                              AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
         (g)           The burden of showing that the trade mark is not valid is 
    

extremely heavy on the challenger. No Court will lightly brush aside the
factum of registration. Though it is permissible to argue that the factum of
registration will have prima facie proof of its validity, it cannot be easily
dislodged.

(h) Since this Court has always demanded extremely high degree of proof from a
challenger regarding validity of registration of trade mark and in almost all
cases the injunctions have been granted on the basis of the trade mark, it has
thus become a practice of this Court not to lightly accept challenge to the
validity of the trade mark. While using the discretion to grant injunction on
the basis of the registration of trade mark, this Court has almost always
granted such injunction; it is in this context that this Court has held that
it is the practice of the Court to grant injunction on the basis of the
registration.

(i) It is one thing to say that at an interlocutory stage, once the suit is
brought on the basis of the infringement of registration of trade mark,
injunction should normally be granted than to say that the injunction must be
granted and the defendant cannot argue that the trade mark is not valid. Even
if such argument is advanced, the Court can always use its discretion to hold
that in a given case the heavy burden is not discharged and rely upon practice
of this Court in generally not granting the injunction, but to completely shut
out an enquiry will be contrary to the statute.

24 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
                                                                                     
         (j)            At the hearing of an application for interlocutory relief, 
    
    
    
    
                                                             
    

the Court is guided by the three considerations of (a) prima facie case; (b)
balance of convenience; and (c) irreparable injury/ injustice. It is no longer
res integra that an enquiry into these parameters also obliges the Court to
consider the strength/merit of the defence put forth by the defendant. A
fortiori, it is, therefore, axiomatic that in making this enquiry, the Court
will consider all defences that the defendant may raise, including defences on
the invalidity of the registration of the mark whose registration is sought to
be enforced.

(k) Whether any interpretation which prevents a defendant from raising such a
defence and which prevents the Court from examining such defence, to be
countenanced, the inexorable result thereof would be to bring forth a
situation which would defeat the ends of justice and entail extremely serious
ramifications. It will have the effect of depriving a defendant of an
important right (defence), which the statute itself confers upon him. There is
nothing in the language of the Act nor can anything be inferred by
implication, which denies the defendant such an important defence.

25 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                             AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
                              SUBMISSIONS IN REJOINDER
    

9\. Dr.Tulzapurkar, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff, in rejoinder,
submitted that:

(a) Had the intention of the Legislature been only to provide for burden of
proof of invalidity of registration being cast on the applicant for
rectification or for the provisions of Section 31 to have only evidentiary
value, and not the recognition of the right of registration, the Legislature
would have enacted Section 31 in the same words as those in Section 19 & 22of
the Designs Act 2000 and sections 64 and 107 of the Patent Act 1970.

(b) Provisions similar to the Designs Act and Patent Act above referred to, in
respect of the presumption of entry made in the Register are separately made
in Section 137 in addition to the presumption of validity of the registered
trade mark (U/Sec 31) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

(c) Section 31 and Section 137 operate in different fields and Section 31 must
be given full effect. Section 31 recognizes the rights created by registration
and the said rights continue so long as the mark stands registered and the
presumption of validity of registration remains valid and operative till it is
rebutted at the final disposal of the rectification application by an order
for rectification, and not at any stage before that, and only in rectification
proceedings before the appropriate authority i.e the Registrar or the
Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB).

26 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
         (d)            Before   granting   registration   the   Registrar   is   statutorily 
    

obliged to take into consideration all grounds provided for in Sections 9, 11,
13 of the Act, and unless the applicant for registration discharges the burden
of showing that the mark is distinctive or has acquired distinctiveness or is
one which can be registered, his mark cannot/will not be registered. But once
this burden is discharged by the applicant for registration and the Registrar,
on being so satisfied duly registers the trade mark, the registered proprietor
is not expected nor required to discharge the same burden again at an
interlocutory stage of the suit if the Defendant disputes the validity of
registration. It is for this purpose that the provisions were made in section
31 of the Act to the effect that in all the legal proceedings the registration
shall be prima facie valid. If the civil court is required to go into the
question of invalidity at a prima facie stage when it is considering the
application for injunction then there was no need for providing for
registration at all. As like in a passing off action the plaintiff would have
been required to prove that his mark possesses all qualities required for
registration and has acquired distinctiveness. The scheme of the Act clearly
shows that the plea of invalidity cannot be considered at an interlocutory
stage in a suit for infringement. It is further to be noted that if such plea
is allowed then instead of the Defendant being required to discharge the
burden of proving invalidity, the Plaintiff whose mark is registered will have
to discharge the burden of proving that the registration is not invalid.
Further, sec 18 to 23 of the Act are also significant. These provide  27 :::
Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D for
statutory advertisement of the application for registration, opportunity to
oppose the application and a decision thereon. When the Act provides for
opposition proceedings before a Trade Mark is registered , then the
registration once granted has to be given full effect and rights conferred by
registration have to be upheld and enforced, unless the registration is
expunged. This is another reason why, at an interlocutory stage, the
registration cannot be questioned.

(e) The provisions of Section 124 are also required to be considered not by
themselves, but along with the provisions of Sections 28 and 31 and 91 of the
Act. As mentioned above, the provisions of Section 124 (Sec.111 of 1958 Act)
were incorporated so that the IPAB decides the question of invalidity and the
civil court trying the suit for infringement passes a decree in the suit in
conformity with the final decision of the IPAB. The very fact that the civil
court is required to pass a decree in conformity with the final decision of
the IPAB shows that the civil court cannot touch upon or deal with the
question of validity of registration. The civil court trying an infringement
Suit, does not have any jurisdiction to consider the validity of registration
at all, even at the final hearing of the Suit. Hence, much less can it go into
that question at the interlocutory stage. The jurisdiction is barred at every
stage of the suit.

28 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
         (f)           In   view   of   the   express   ouster   of   jurisdiction   of   a   civil 
    

court to consider the question of validity, if the legislature wanted the
civil court at an interlocutory stage to consider, though, prima facie, or
tentatively or during the pendency of the rectification application, the
question of validity then an express provision conferring such power or
jurisdiction on the civil court was required to be made. In the absence of
such express provision it is not permissible by resorting to the general
principles applicable to the grant of interlocutory injunction to permit the
civil court to consider the plea of invalidity. It is a settled position in
law that what cannot be done directly cannot be done indirectly. If such a
plea is considered by a civil court it will amount to exercise of jurisdiction
by the civil court which it does not possess at any stage of the suit. The
aforesaid submission is supported by the express provision made in Section 9A
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, introduced in the State of Maharashtra.

(g) The Registrar, the IPAB and the civil Court are statutory functionaries
under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, each having a separate distinct and
independent jurisdiction which cannot be transgressed by any one of them.
While registration can be granted only by the Registrar, rectification can be
allowed only by the Registrar or only by the IPAB as the case may be, and
reliefs in a suit for infringement can be granted only by a civil court. There
is no question of any of the functionaries being put on a higher pedestal
while they exercise there respective jurisdiction/ functions.

29 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
         (h)            While there cannot be any dispute about the principles 
    
    
    
    
                                                                                     
    

to be applied while considering an application for interim reliefs in an
infringement action, it is submitted that the plea of invalidity, not being a
defense that can be raised at any stage of the suit until it is held by the
appropriate authority that the registration is invalid, there is no question
of such plea being considered while considering as to whether the Plaintiff
has made out a prima facie case. The Act provides for the defenses which are
available to a Defendant in an infringement action and those defenses can be
raised at any stage of the suit to resist any relief that the Plaintiff seeks.
The general principles governing the grant of injunction cannot be construed
to confer an additional defense of invalidity to the Defendant at an
interlocutory stage, which the statute does not permit the Court to go into, &
which defense the civil court is precluded from considering even at the final
stage of the suit, and the civil court is ordained to respect the decision of
the appropriate forum, that is the Registrar or the IPAB as the case may be,
and pass the final decree in accordance with such decision, and the civil
court is not entitled to take any view different from the view taken by such
authority on the question of validity or plea of invalidity of registration.
The Civil Court has to proceed on the basis that the registration is valid at
the interlocutory stage.

30 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
          Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
                                  STATUTORY PROVISIONS
    
    
    
    
                                                                                    
    

10\. Before discussing the rival submissions, we may set out the relevant
provisions of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 which call for our interpretation. The
Trade Marks Act, 1999 is an Act "to amend and consolidate the law relating to
trade marks, to provide for registration and better protection of trade marks
for goods and services and for the prevention of the use of fraudulent marks".

The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Trade Marks Act, 1991 indicates as
under :-

> ".... It was felt that a comprehensive review of the existing law be made in
> view of developments in trading and commercial practices, increasing
> globalisation of trade and industry, the need to encourage investment flows
> and transfer of technology, need for simplification and harmonization of
> trade mark management systems and to give effect to important judicial
> decisions. To achieve these purposes, the present Bill proposes to
> incorporate, inter alia the following namely :-
    
    
                     (a) .....           .....          .....
                     (b) .....           .....          .....
    
    
    
    
    
    

> (c) amplification of factors to be considered for defining a well-known
> mark;

> (d) doing away with the system of maintaining registration of trade marks in
> Part A and Part B with different legal rights, and to provide only a single
> register with simplified procedure for registration and with equal rights;

31 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

> (e) simplifying the procedure for registration of registered user and
> enlarging the scope of permitted use;

> (f) ...... ..... .....

> (g) providing an Appellate Board for speedy disposal of appeals and
> rectification applications which at present lie before High Courts;
    
    
                      (h)    .....            .....            .....
    
    
    
    
                                              
                      (i)    .....            .....            .....
                      (j)    .....
                              ig            .....            .....
                      (k)    .....            .....            .....
    
    

> (l) incorporating other provisions like amending the definition of "trade
> marks", ............... amplifying the powers of the court to grant ex parte
> injunction in certain cases and other related amendments to simplify and
> streamline the trade mark law and procedure."

Section 2 of the Act contains, inter alia, the following definitions :-

> "(w) "registered trade mark" means a trade mark which is actually on the
> register and remaining in force;

> (zb) "trade mark" means a mark capable of being represented graphically and
> which is capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from
> those of others and may include shape of goods, their packaging and
> combination of colours; and ................."

32 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Section 6, inter alia, contains the following
> : "6. The Register of Trade Marks - (1) For the purposes of this Act, a
> record called the Register of Trade Marks shall be kept at the head office
> of the Trade Marks Registry, wherein shall be entered all the registered
> trade marks with the names, addresses and description of the proprietors,
> notifications of assignment and transmissions, the names, addresses and
> descriptions of registered users, conditions, limitations and such other
> matter relating to registered trade marks as may be prescribed.

> (2) to (6) ..... ...... .....

> (7) The Register of Trade Marks, both Part A and Part B, existing at the
> commencement of this Act, shall be incorporated in and form part of the
> register under this Act."

> Section 9 lays down the absolute grounds for refusal of registration and
> such absolute grounds are as under :-

> "9. Absolute grounds for refusal of registration. -

> (1) The trade marks -

> (a) which are devoid of any distinctive character, that is to say, not
> capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of
> another person;

> (b) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which may serve in
> trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, values,
> geographical origin or the time of production of the goods or rendering of
> the service or other characteristics of the goods or service;

> (c) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which have become
> customary in the current language or in the bona fide and established
> practices of the trade, shall not be registered:

33 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Provided that a trade mark shall not be
> refused registration if before the date of application for registration it
> has acquired a distinctive character as a result of the use made of it or is
> a well-known trade mark.

> (2) A mark shall not be registerd as a trade mark if--

> (a) it is of such nature as to deceive the public or cause confusion;

> (b) it contains or comprises of any matter likely to hurt the religious
> susceptibilities of any class or section of the citizens of India;

> (c) it comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter;

> (d) its use is prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of
> Improper Use) Act, 1950 (12 of 1950)....."

> Section 11 lays down the relative grounds for refusal of registration if
> there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which
> includes the likelihood of the association of the earlier trade mark on
> account of its identity with or similarity with an earlier trade mark or
> identity or similarity of goods covered by the earlier trade mark and there
> are also certain other relative grounds for refusal of registration.

Section 12 provides for registration of a case of honest concurrent use or of
other special circumstances.

Sections 13 to 17 lay down some prohibitions.

34 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

11\. Chapter III of the Act lays down the procedure for and duration of the
registration. Section 18 provides for an application in writing to be made to
the Registrar of Trade Mark in the prescribed manner for the registration of
the trade mark.

Section 20 provides for advertisement of application for registration after it
is accepted, absolute or subject to conditions or limitations.

Section 21 provides for opposition to registration within four months from the
date of the advertisement of an application for registration. Such opposition
is required to be served on the applicant and the applicant may give his
counter-statement on the grounds on which he relies for his application. Such
counter-

statement is also required to be served upon the person giving a notice of
opposition. The applicant as well as the opponent may rely upon evidence to be
submitted in the prescribed manner and in the prescribed time to the Registrar
of Trade marks, who will give both of them an opportunity of hearing, if they
so desire. After hearing the parties and considering the evidence, the
Registrar shall decide whether and subject to what conditions or limitations,
if any, the registration is to be permitted and may take into account a ground
of objection, whether relied upon by the opponent or not.

35 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Section 23 provides for registration of the
trade mark within 18 months from the filing of the application with effect
from the date of making of the application which shall be treated as date of
registration. On registration of the trade mark, the Registrar may issue to
the applicant a certificate in the prescribed form.

Section 25 provides for duration of such registered trade mark for a period of
ten years, which may be renewed from time to time.

12\. Chapter IV of the Act provides for "Effect of Registration" and the
following sections are required to be quoted :-

> "27. No action for infringement of unregistered trade mark.-

> (1) No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent, or
> to recover damages for, the infringement of an unregistered trade mark.

> (2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against
> any person for passing off goods or services as the goods of another person
> or as services provided by another person, or the remedies in respect
> thereof."

> "28. Rights conferred by registration.-

> (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration of a trade
> mark shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of the trade mark
> the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods or
> services in respect of which the trade mark is registered and to obtain
> relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in the manner provided
> by this Act.

36 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D (2) The exclusive right to the use of a trade
> mark given under sub-section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and
> limitations to which the registration is subject.

> (3) Where two or more persons are registered proprietors of trade marks,
> which are identical with or nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right
> to the use of any of those trade marks shall not (except so far as their
> respective rights are subject to any conditions or limitations entered on
> the register) be deemed to have been acquired by any one of those persons as
> against any other of those persons merely by registration of the trade marks
> but each of those persons has otherwise the same rights as against other
> persons (not being registered users using by way of permitted use) as he
> would have if he were the sole registered proprietor.

> 29\. Infringement of registered trade marks.-

> (1) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a
> registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the
> course of trade, a mark which is identical with, or deceptively similar to,
> the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of which the
> trade mark is registered and in such manner as to render the use of the mark
> likely to be taken as being used as a trade mark.

(2) to (9) ..... ..... ....."

Section 30 permits use of a registered trade mark in certain circumstances.

37 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Section 31 is important and is required to be
quoted in its entirety :-

> "31. Registration to be prima facie evidence of validity - (1) In all legal
> proceedings relating to a trade mark registered under this Act (including
> applications under section 57), the original registration of the trade mark
> and of all subsequent assignments and transmissions of the trade mark shall
> be prima facie evidence of the validity thereof.

> (2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid a registered trade mark shall not
> be held to be invalid on the ground that it was not a registrable trade mark
> under section 9 except upon evidence of distinctiveness and that such
> evidence was not submitted to the Registrar before registration, if it is
> proved that the trade mark had been so used by the registered proprietor or
> his predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the date of
> registration."

> Section 32 provides for protection of registration on ground of
> distinctiveness in certain cases. Section 33 for effect of acquiescence and
> Section 34 saves certain vested rights.

Section 35 saves for bona fide use by a person of his own name or that of his
place of his business or any bona fide description of character or quality of
his goods or services. Similarly, Section 36 provides for saving of words for
use of name, address or description of goods or services.

38 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

13\. Chapter VII provides for "Rectification and correction of the register".
Section 57 confers power of rectification on the Intellectual Property
Appellate Board (Appellate Board) established under Section 83 or to the
Registrar of Trade Marks by any person aggrieved in the following terms :

> "57. Power to cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register.--

> (1) On application made in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or
> to the Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal may make such order
> as it may think fit for cancelling or varying the registration of a trade
> mark on the ground of any contravention, or failure to observe a condition
> entered on the register in relation thereto.

> (2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any
> entry, or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by
> any entry wrongly remaining on the register, or by any error or defect in
> any entry in the register, may apply in the prescribed manner to the
> Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the tribunal may make such order
> for making, expunging or varying the entry as it may think fit.

> (3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any
> question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the
> rectification of the register.

> (4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the
> prescribed manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an
> opportunity of being heard, make any order referred to in sub-section (1) or
> sub-section (2).

39 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D (5) Any order of the Appellate Board
> rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification shall
> be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt
> of such notice rectify the register accordingly."

> Sections 58, 59 and 60 provides for correction, alteration or adaptation of
> entries in the register.

Chapter XI provides for the establishment and composition of the Appellate
Board (Intellectual Property Appellate Board) and provides for an appeal to
the Board against an order or decision of the Registrar. Section 93 provides
that no court or other authority shall exercise any jurisdiction to entertain
any matter which could be subject matter of appeal to the Appellate Board.

14\. Chapter XIII of the Act though titled "Miscellaneous"

contains important provisions.

Section 124 provides for stay of proceedings where validity of the trade mark
is questioned. The section is required to be quoted in its entirety :

> "124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the trade
> mark is questioned, etc. -

> (1) Where in any suit for infringement of a trade mark

> (a) the defendant pleads that registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is
> invalid; or  40 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday
> AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

> (b) the defendant raises a defence under clause (3) of sub-section (2) of
> section 30 and the plaintiff pleads the invalidity of registration of the
> defendant's trade mar, the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as
> the court), shall, -

> (i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in relation to the
> plaintiff's or defendant's trade mark are pending before the Registrar or
> the Appellate Board, stay the suit pending the final disposal of such
> proceedings;

> (ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the
> plea regarding the invalidity of the registration of the plaintiff's or
> defendant's trade mark is prima facie tenable, raise an issue regarding the
> same and adjourn the case for a period of three months from the date of the
> framing of the issue in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the
> Appellate Board for rectification of the register.

> (2) If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made any such
> application as is referred to in clause

> (b) (ii) of sub-section (1) within the time specified therein or within such
> extended time as the court may sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit
> shall stand stayed until the final disposal of the rectification
> proceedings.

> (3) If no such application as aforesaid has been made within the time so
> specified or within such extended time as the court may allow, the issue as
> to the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be
> deemed to have been abandoned and the court shall proceed with the suit in
> regard to the other issues in the case.

41 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D (4) The final order made in any rectification
> proceedings referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
> binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of the suit conformably
> to such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the
> registration of the trade mark.

> (5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a trade mark under this
> section shall not preclude the court from making any interlocutory order
> (including any order granting an injunction directing account to be kept,
> appointing a receiver or attaching any property), during the period of the
> stay of the suit."

> Section 125 is also important. It reads as under :- "125. Application for
> rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain cases. -

> (1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark the validity
> of the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is questioned by the
> defendant or where in any such suit the defendant raises a defence under
> clause (e) of sub- section (2) of section 30 and the plaintiff questions the
> validity of the registration of the defendant's trade mark, the issue as to
> the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be
> determined only on an application for the rectification of the register and,
> notwithstanding anything contained in section 47 or section 57, such
> application shall be made to the Appellate Board and not to the Registrar.

> (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where an application for
> rectification of the register is made to the Registrar under Section 47 or
> section 57, the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refer the application at
> any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board."

42 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Section 134 provides for suit for
> infringement to be instituted before District Court. Section 134(1) reads as
> under :-

> "(1) No suit -

> (a) for the infringement of a registered trade mark;

> or

> (b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark;

> or

> (c) for passing off arising out of the use by the defendant of any trade
> mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade
> mark, whether registered or unregistered, shall be instituted in any court
> inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.

(2) ..... ..... ...... "

> Section 136 provides that in every proceeding under Chapter VII
> (Rectification and Correction of Register) or under Section 91 (appeal from
> the order or decision of the Registrar of Trade Marks to IPAB), every
> registered user of a trade mark, using by way of permitted use, who is not
> himself an applicant, shall be made a party to the proceedings.

Section 141 provides for certificate of validity in the following terms :

> "141. Certificate of validity - If in any legal proceeding for rectification
> of the register before the Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in
> favour of the registered proprietor of the trade mark on the issue as to the
> validity  43 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday
> AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D of the registration of the trade mark, the
> Appellate Board may grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a
> certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceeding in which
> the said validity comes into question the said proprietor on obtaining a
> final order of judgment in his favour affirming validity of the registration
> of the trade mark shall, unless the said final order of judgment for
> sufficient reason directs otherwise, be entitled to his full cost charges
> and expenses as between legal practitioner and client."

> Section 157 confers power on the Central Government to make rules to the
> conditions of previous publication, to carry out the provisions of the Act,
> giving a notice of opposition, etc. Accordingly, the Trade Marks Rules, 2002
> have been made by the Central Government.

15\. In the present Reference, we are not concerned with any procedural issue
and, therefore, no reference is required to be made to any particular rule.

16\. The functioning of the Appellate Board is governed by the Intellectual
Property Appellate Board (Procedure) Rules, 2003.

Nothing turns upon these rules and, therefore, we may now proceed to discuss
the legal position.

44 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

    
    
          Uday                                                        AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
                                 LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
    
    
    
    
                                                                           
    

17\. Before proceeding to deal with the rival submissions, it is necessary to
make a brief reference to the history of the relevant statutory provisions
which are now to be found in the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (hereinafter referred
to as the "1999 Act") vis-a-vis the provisions of the Trade Marks Act, 1958
(hereinafter referred to as the "1958 Act") and their legislative history.
First the definition of the "Registered Trade Mark".

    
    
    
    
    
    
                                         
                Section
                            ig 1999 Act        Section             1958 Act
    

2(1)(w) "Registered Trade 2(1)(r) "Registered Trade Mark" means a Mark" means
a trade mark which is trade mark which is actually on the actually on the
register and register.

remaining in force.

In view of the above change in the 1999 Act, a person who was earlier a
registered proprietor, but whose registration has lapsed or is no longer in
force, cannot be treated as a registered proprietor by the mere fact of his
name physically continuing on the register (pending the formal act of its
physical deletion). In other words, the trade mark must be on the register,
both `in law' and 'in fact'.

18\. The next important provision is Section 28 of the 1999 Act which is in
pari materia with Section 28 of the 1958 Act. The words "if valid" have
generated a lot of debate and, therefore, it is necessary to refer to its
legislative history. Section 21 of the Trade  45 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D Marks Act, 1940 which
preceded the Trade Marks Act, 1958, contained the words "if valid". However,
by an amendment to the 1940 Act in 1946, the words "if valid" were deleted.
The Notes of Clauses to the said amendment (L.A. Bill No.20 of 1946) read as
under :-

> "Clause 5. - (a) The purpose of omitting the words "if valid" is to make it
> impossible for any court to go into the question of validity of registration
> in an infringement action unless rectification proceedings are taken. Where
> a trade mark has been registered in British India and an infringement action
> is filed in an Indian State, it will not be open to the Indian State to
> challenge the validity of the registration in British India. That can be
> done only by the aggrieved party taking rectification proceedings in British
> India.

> (b) This clause renumbers th present section as sub- section (1) and adds a
> further sub-section in order to implement the reciprocal arrangement which
> has been arrived at between British India and the Indian States."

> The purpose of omitting the words "if valid" was to make it impossible for
> any Court to go into the question of registration in an infringement action,
> unless rectification proceedings were taken. Where a trade mark was
> registered in British India and infringement action is taken in Indian
> State, it was not open to the Indian State to challenge the validity of the
> registration and that could be done only by the aggrieved party taking
> rectification proceedings in British India. Thus, the rationale behind the
> amendment was that a registration granted by Registrar in British India
> could not be called into question before a native  46 ::: Downloaded on -
> 26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D State. The presence
> of words "if valid" would have enabled the Court in a native State to
> examine and/or go into and/or make an inquiry into questions of invalidity
> of the registration granted by the Registrar in British India. This the
> British legislature was not desirous of permitting and hence the amendment
> in 1946 to delete the words "if valid". However, after India became
> independent, when the Trade Marks Act, 1958 was enacted, the words "if
> valid"

were re-introduced. Clause 28 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Act of 1958 read as under :

> "Clause 28. - The references to Part A register are consequential to the
> introduction of Part B register. The words "if valid" which were deleted
> previously have now been reintroduced in this clause so as to provide
> explicitly that a defendant in an action for infringement may question the
> validity of the plaintiff's registration. But in such cases the issue as to
> validity must be determined by rectification proceedings in accordance with
> clause 111 of this Bill. The latter part of section 21 of the Trade Marks
> Act, 1940, which deals with what constitutes infringement, has been made the
> subject of a separate clause 29. Sub- clause (2) corresponds to the first
> part of section 22(1) of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. Sub-clause (3), which is
> new, clarifies the law as to the rights of registered proprietors, where the
> same mark is registered by two or more different persons."

19\. The third important provision viz Section 31 of the 1999 Act is in pari
materia with the provisions of Section 31 of the Act of 1958\. In other
orders, the words "the original registration of the trade mark and of all
subsequent assignments and transmissions of the trade mark shall be prima
facie evidence of the validity thereof" were also present in the Act of 1958.

47 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

20\. There is no provision in the 1999 Act which is in pari materia with
Section 32 of the Act of 1958 which read as under :-

> "32. Registration to be conclusive as to validity after seven years.-
> Subject to the provisions of section 35 and section 46, in all legal
> proceedings relating to a trade mark registered in Part A of the register
> (including applications under section 56), the original registration of the
> trade mark shall, after the expiration of seven years from the date of such
> registration, be taken to be valid in all respects unless it is proved -

> (a) that the original registration was obtained by fraud;

> (b) that the trade mark was registered in contravention of the provisions of
> section 11 or offends against the provisions of that section on the dater of
> commencement of the proceedings; or

> (c) that the trade mark was not, at the commencement of the proceedings,
> distinctive of the goods of the registered proprietor."

21\. The contention of the defendant is that the deletion of Section 32 is
also evidence of the legislative intent not to create or perpetuate conclusive
presumption, even in very limited cases.

The power of rectification conferred by Section 57 of the 1999 Act was also
conferred by Section 56 of the 1958 Act, but the power of rectification was
conferred on the Registrar or the High Court. In other words, the forum for
rectification proceedings which was earlier High Court, apart from the
Registrar of Trade Marks, is now the Intellectual Property Appellate Board
("Appellate Board" for brevity).

48 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

22\. Section 124 of the 1999 Act contains provisions which are in pari materia
with Section 111 of the 1958 Act. These provisions under the new Act as well
as the old Act, provide that where a challenge to the validity of the
plaintiff's trade mark is raised in a suit for infringement of a trade mark
before a Civil Court and the Civil Court finds the said challenge as prima
facie tenable, the Civil Court will raise an issue regarding the same and
adjourn the case for a period of three months from the date of the framing of
the issue in order to enable the defendant to apply to the Appellate Board for
rectification of the register. If the defendant satisfies the Civil Court that
he has made any such application within the specified time or the extended
time, the trial of the suit shall stand stayed till the final disposal of the
rectification proceedings. However, such stay does not preclude the Civil
Court from making any interlocutory order (including any order granting an
injunction) during the period of the stay of the suit. If such application is
not made by the defendant within the specified or the extended time, the issue
as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be
deemed to have been abandoned and the Court shall proceed with the suit with
regard to the other issues in the case. If any final order is made in the
rectification proceedings, such final order shall be binding upon the parties
and the Civil Court shall dispose of the suit in conformity with such final
order, in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the
registration of the trade mark.

49 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

23\. Provisions analogous to those of Section 125 in the 1999 Act were not to
be found in the 1958 Act. This section specifically provides that where the
validity of the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is questioned by
the defendant, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade
mark concerned shall be determined only on an application for the
rectification of the register and notwithstanding anything contained in
Sections 47 or 57, such application shall be made to the Appellate Board and
not to the Registrar.

DISCUSSION

24\. On an analysis of the provisions of Sections 2(w), 28, 31, 57, 124 and
125 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and on consideration of the legislative
history, it appears to us that the legislature continued the provisions of
Sections 28, 31 and 111 (124 in the 1999 Act) of the 1958 Act notwithstanding
the changes made in Section 56 of the old Act (Section 57 of the new Act) and
insertion of a new Section 125 in the new Act.

It is clear that till the enactment of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the forum
for deciding the suit for infringement and the forum for rectification
proceedings was the same,viz., the High Court. The High Court, therefore,
could take up both, the suit for infringement and the rectification
proceedings, simultaneously, and  50 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:23
::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D therefore, Section 28 and Section 31
operated with same content and contours in the suit for infringement as well
as in the rectification proceedings. The presumption in Section 31 of the 1958
Act regarding "prima facie evidence of the validity" of the trade mark,
therefore, operated both during pendency of the suit and during pendency of
the rectification proceedings. However, the material change brought about by
the 1999 Act now provides that while the suit for infringement of a trade mark
may be pending before the District Court or a High Court, where the defendant
questions the validity of the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark, such
question shall be finally determined only on an application for the
rectification of the register to be made to the Appellate Board.

Thus, the question can be answered only by the Intellectual Property Appellate
Board and not by the Civil Court or the High Court trying the suit for
infringement.

Even so what the Civil Court/High Court can do under Section 124 of the new
Act is that if the Court is satisfied that the plea regarding invalidity of
the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is prima facie tenable, the
Court will raise an issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for three
months to enable the defendant to apply to the Appellate Board for
rectification of the register and upon such application being made, the trial
of the suit shall stand stayed until final disposal of the rectification
proceedings. Thus, Section 124 read with Section 125 bars the jurisdiction of
the Civil Court from deciding the question raised by  51 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D the defendant about
validity of the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark. Sub-section (5) of
Section 124 of the 1999 Act, like sub-section (5) of Section 111 of the 1958
Act, however, expressly permits the Civil Court to make an interlocutory order
including an order granting an injunction, directing accounts to be kept,
appointing a receiver or attaching any property during the period of the stay
of the suit. Provisions of Section 124 therefore contemplate that if the
defendant's plea regarding validity of the registration of the plaintiff's
trade mark is frivolous, the Court is not bound to grant the defendant time to
file rectification proceedings before the Appellate Board and even if such
proceedings are pending, the Civil Court can grant injunction in favour of the
plaintiff in the suit for infringement of the plaintiff's trade mark.

25\. The moot question, however, is whether at this interlocutory stage while
considering the question whether the defendant's plea regarding invalidity of
the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is prima facie tenable, the
Civil Court is precluded from considering whether the registration granted in
favour of the plaintiff is totally illegal or fraudulent or unconscionable
which shocks the conscience of the Court.

26\. It does, therefore, appear that the expression "if valid" in Section 28
and the words "prima facie evidence of the validity" of the trade mark in
Section 31 of the 1999 Act permit the Court to  52 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:23 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D consider at the
interlocutory stage the defendant's plea regarding invalidity of the
registration of the plaintiff's trade mark.

27\. There was a serious debate at the hearing whether the question to be
considered by the Civil Court at this stage is merely to ensure that the
defendant's plea is not frivolous or thoroughly hopeless or whether the Court
can also consider whether the defendant's plea is so strong that the Court
should refuse to grant injunction on the ground that the registration granted
in favour of the plaintiff is totally illegal or fraudulent or such that
shocks the conscience of the Court.

28\. Dr.Tulzapurkar, learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff, submitted that
while exercising the powers under sub-sections (1) and (5) of Section 124 of
the 1999 Act, the Civil Court trying the suit for infringement is only
supposed to consider the lower threshold i.e. whether the defendant's plea
questioning the validity of the plaintiff's trade mark is so frivolous that
the Court should adjourn the trial of the suit to enable the defendant to make
an application to the Appellate Board for rectification proceedings. It is
submitted that at the interlocutory stage the Civil Court is not required to
make any further probe and has to proceed on the basis of the validity of the
registration as per the presumption raised by Section 31 which can only be
rebutted in the rectification proceedings before the Appellate Board under
Section 57 read with Section 125 of the 1999 Act.

53 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

29\. That takes us back to the interpretation of Section 28 read with Sections
134 and 135 of the 1999 Act. It is clear that Section 28 confers substantive
rights by providing that subject to the other provisions of the Act, the
registration of trade mark shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor
of the trade mark the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation
to the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered and
to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in the manner
provided by the Act. Section 134 merely provides for the forum for obtaining
the reliefs for the infringement of a registered trade mark. Such forum shall
be a Court not inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the
suit. We, therefore, find considerable substance in the submission made on
behalf of the defendant that the words "if valid" are not without significance
specially read in light of the legislative history. The Trade Marks Act, 1940
included the words "if valid" and they were deleted in 1946 in order to take
away the powers of a Court in a native State to examine challenge to the
validity of the registration of the trade mark granted by the Registrar in
British India. However, the 1958 Act again introduced those words; meaning
thereby, the power to examine the question of validity of the registration of
trade mark was given back to the Court.

30\. The basic rule of interpretation of statutes is that if the words of the
statute are precise and clear then nothing more is required than to give
effect to their natural meaning. When the  54 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014
23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D words are clear it is not
necessary to go looking for a different meaning, by resorting to external and
internal aids. When the plain reading leads to absurdity other modes of
interpretation are resorted to. When the language is plain and clear, the
statute speaks for itself.

31\. Section 31 uses the phrase 'prima facie' which when plainly read, means
registration will be a prima facie evidence. The expression 'prima facie' is
too well-settled to be expounded. To substitute the words 'prima facie' with
'conclusive evidence', would be re-writing the section. Section 28 uses the
phrase 'if valid'. If the registration was to be the 'conclusive', it was not
necessary to introduce the phrases 'if valid' and 'prima facie'. In series of
decisions, the Delhi High Court, Madras High Court, Andhra Pradesh High Court
and Gujrat High Court have given plain meaning to these phrases to come to the
conclusion that registration will be a prima facie evidence of its validity
and not a conclusive evidence.

32\. The argument that the Court must grant injunction to the proprietor of a
registered trademark rests on two grounds. Firstly, that it is a practice of
this Court to grant such injunction, and secondly, the scheme of the Act
requires it to be so.

55 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

33\. As regards "the practice of this Court", it is interesting to note how
this 'practice' originated. The origin lies in a passage quoted by Vimadalal,
J. in the case of Hindustan Embroidery Mills v. K. Ravindra & Co.2 from the
book by Kerly on Trademarks. Vimadalal J. referred to a passage from the book
which stated that it is not the practice to consider the validity of
registration of mark on a motion for interlocutory injunction and while the
mark remains in the register even though wrongly, it is desirable that others
should not imitate it. Thereafter the Division Bench in the case of
M/s.Maxheal Pharmaceuticals (India) and others v. Shalina Laboratories Pvt.
Ltd.3 referred to the decision of Vimadalal, J.

and observed that Vimadalal, J. has pointed out that it is not "the practice
of this Court" to consider validity of a trademark on a motion for
interlocutory injunction. The Division Bench attributed the phrase 'practice
of this Court' to Vimadalal J., though Vimadalal,J. had not used the phrase
'the practice of this Court'. He had only referred to Kerly on Trademarks
which contained a passage that it is a 'practice' not to consider the validity
of the registration. However, the observations of the Division Bench in
Maxheal have now been followed in various orders, treating it as a 'practice
of this Court'. Be that as it may, since it is treated as a practice of this
Court, we have to consider whether to elevate it to an absolute proposition of
law, and also whether the Act requires it to be an absolute proposition.
Mr.Kadam analysed various 2 1967 Vol. LXXVI Bom.L.R. 146  3 Appeal No.88/2005
decided on 16.2.2005 56 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D decisions of the English Courts referred to by Kerly
in his commentary, to point out that even in England at the relevant time, it
was not the consistent practice followed by Court not to question the validity
of the trademark.

34\. While we agree with Dr.Tulzapurkar for the Plaintiff that the object of
providing for registration of a trade mark and recognising the exclusive right
of the registered proprietor to use the registered trade mark in order to
prevent others from using an identical or deceptively similar trade mark is to
obviate the necessity of proving in each and every case the Plaintiff's title
to the mark, its distinctiveness and its reputation, we are of the view that
the object has been achieved by raising a presumption, and a strong
presumption in law, as to the validity of registration of the mark.

The burden is therefore cast, and a heavy burden at that, on the Defendant to
question the validity of registration. While such a challenge can finally
succeed only in a rectification proceedings which now lie before the
Intellectual Property Appellate Tribunal (IPAT), we do not find any express or
implied bar in the Trade Marks Act to completely take away the jurisdiction
and power of the Civil Court to consider the challenge to the validity of
registration of the trade mark at the interlocutory stage by way of a prima
facie finding on such issue.

57 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

35\. The words "if valid" in section 28 and "prima facie evidence of title" in
section 31 support the Defendant's case that the defence of invalidity of
registration of the Plaintiff's trade mark can be considered at the
interlocutory stage. As per the settled legal position, a Court hearing and
deciding an interlocutory application for injunction during the pendency of
the suit is required to consider: (i) prima facie case; (ii) balance of
convenience; and (iii) where an irreparable injury and injustice would be
caused to the Plaintiff if an interim injunction is not granted.

36\. Ultimately what the Plaintiff seeks from the Court is an order of
injunction. There is nothing in the Act that suggests that any different
parameters are required to be applied when a Plaintiff seeks injunction on the
basis of it's registered trademark. The learned Single Judge of Delhi High
Court in the case of N.R.Dongre v. Whirpool Corpn4. granted injunction in
favour of TVS WHIRLPOOL against M/s Chinar Trust inspite of M/s Chinar Trust
holding registered trademark WHIRLPOOL. The appeal was carried by the M/s
Chinar Trust to the Appeal bench of Delhi High Court which was dismissed and
the matter was thereafter carried to the Apex Court. While upholding the
decision of the learned Single Judge and Division bench of Delhi High Court,
the Apex Court posed a question to itself as to whether the exercise of
discretion by the trial Court to grant interlocutory injunction was in
accordance with settled principles of law regulating interlocutory injunction
or 4 1996 PTC (16)  58 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D not. The Apex Court held it to be so. The Apex Court
reiterated that an injunction is a relief in equity and based on equitable
principles. If the arguments of Dr.Tulzapurkar are to be accepted, even in the
cases where the Court is convinced that the grant of injunction would lead to
highly inequitable results, the Court would be powerless to refuse the relief.

37\. We will now consider the Plaintiff's submissions based on the comparison
of Trademarks Act with the provisions of the Designs Act and the Patents Act.
It is submitted that the Designs Act, 2000 [Section 22(4) read with Section
19] and the Patents Act [Section 10 read with Section 64] (unlike Trademarks
Act) contain express provisions permitting the Defendant in an action for
infringement of copyright in a design and for infringement of patent to raise
the plea of invalidity of registration of design/grant of patent.

38\. Though the argument may appear prima facie attractive, it needs to be
remembered that the Designs Act, 1911 and the Patents Act, 1970 do not contain
the provisions of Sections 28 and 31 to be found in the Trade Marks Act, 1999.
It is for this reason that section 22 of the Designs Act and section 107 of
the Patents Act provide that every ground on which registration of a design
can be cancelled under section 19 of the Designs Act or every ground on which
the patent may be revoked under section 64 of the Patents Act shall be
available as ground of defence. We, therefore, find that  59 ::: Downloaded on
- 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D the scheme of the
Trade Marks Act is quite different from the scheme of the Designs Act and the
scheme of the Patents Act. As per the well-settled principles of statutory
interpretation, the provisions in one statute are not to be interpreted by
reference to the provisions in another statute.

39\. Dr.Tulzapurkar drew our attention to the reports of the Committees
constituted to make recommendations to amend the Act of 1940. He pointed out
that the Shavaksha Committee was of the opinion that the words "if valid"
should not be included so that the defence of invalidity is not available to
the defendant. He also drew our attention to the report of Justice Rajgopal
Ayyangar Committee which opined that the defence of the invalidity should be
available to the defendant, but recommended that the issue of invalidity
should not be decided by the Court but should be decided in the rectification
application. This may have been the view of the Committee constituted to
recommend changes in the enactment, but at the highest, it was only a material
placed before the legislature at the time of enactment of this statute. The
fact remains that the words "if valid" and "prima facie evidence" were
incorporated in the statute. Furthermore, the question of referring to any
external material would arise if the language of the statute was ambiguous. As
we have already held that the words "if valid" and "prima facie evidence" are
clear enough upon plain reading of them and it is not necessary to adopt any
other rule of interpretation, except literal interpretation.

60 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

40\. We may also note that the Madras High Court has also taken a view that it
is not impermissible to look at the validity of the registration at the
interlocutory stage. In the case of Malar Network (P) Ltd. v. Arun Prasath5,
the plaintiff had filed a suit for infringement to restrain the defendants in
respect of the plaintiff's registered trade mark 'Malar TV' as the defendant
had started a business under the name 'Malar TV'. One of the defences to the
interlocutory application filed by the plaintiff was that the word 'Malar' was
a general word in Tamil, it meant a magazine. The learned Single Judge
declined interlocutory relief holding that the words 'Malar TV' have become
publicia juris. The appeal filed by the plaintiff was also dismissed. In this
case, the Madras High Court made a prima facie enquiry into the question
whether the words in the trademark 'Malar' and 'TV' were publicia juris and
did not automatically grant injunction on the basis of the registration. Same
approach was taken in the case of Parle Products Ltd. v.

Bakemans Industries Ltd.6 and N. Ranga Rao & Sons v. Koya's Persumery Works7.
Gujrat High Court in the case of Regency Sanitary Ware Pvt. Ltd. v. Madhusudan
Industries Ltd8. and Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of AR Gangadhara &
Co. v. Firm of Police Mallaih9 also considered the validity of the trademark
at the time of grant of interim relief. Therefore, we find 5 2011 (2) MWN
(Civil) 828 6 1998 PTC (18) Mad.

    
    
         7    2011 (45) PTC 140 (Mad.) DB.
         8    2001 PTC 422 (Gujarat)
         9    1961 PTC 510 (AP)
    
                                                                                                   61
    
    
    
                                                           ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::
           Uday                                                             AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    

that the High Courts other than the Bombay High Court, have held that it is
not impermissible for the Court to consider the validity of the trademark at
the time of grant of interim injunction.

41\. The case of Milment Oftho Industries v. Allergan Inc.10 needs to be noted
in detail:

    
    
                 (i)            The   appellant   (Milment)   is   an   Indian 
    
    
    
    
                                            
         pharmaceutical   company.     The   respondent   (Allergan   Inc.)   is   a 
    

pharmaceutical company manufacturing products in several countries. Allergan
filed a suit for injunction based on an action for passing off in respect of
mark "OCUFLOX" used on a medicinal preparation manufactured and marketed by
the Allergan. Allergan claimed that it was the first user of the mark
"OCUFLOX" in respect of eye care product containing Ofloxacin and other
compounds. Allergan claimed that they first used the said mark in September
1992 and marketed the product in other countries like Europe, Australia, South
Africa and South America and they had obtained registration in many countries
like Australia, South Africa, Canada and USA and that they had applied for
registration of mark in several other countries including India and that their
registration applications were pending.

(ii) Milment also were selling "OCUFLOX", a medicinal preparation containing
CIPROFLOXACIN HCL for the treatment of eye and ear. They claimed that they
coined the word "OCUFLOX" by 10 2004 (28) PTC 585 (SC)  62 ::: Downloaded on -
26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D taking the prefix "OCU"
from "OCULAR" and "FLOX" from CIPROFLOXACIN, which is the basic constituent of
their product.

Milment applied for registration of the mark "OCUFLOX" in September 1993 and
their registration application was also pending.

(iii) Allergan got an ad-interim injunction in December 1996 which came to be
vacated by a Single Judge in January 1997 on the ground that the plaintiff's
(Allergan) product was not being sold in India and the defendant (Milment) had
introduced the product first in India and, therefore, the plaintiff was not
entitled to an injunction. The plaintiff filed an appeal before the Division
Bench of the High Court which allowed the appeal and held that the plaintiff
was first in the market and, therefore, entitled to an injunction.

(iv) In the appeal filed by Milment, the Supreme Court considered the question
and following its decision in N.R. Dongre vs. Whirlpool Corportion (supra)and
Cadila Health Care Ltd. v.

Cadila Pharmaceutical Ltd.11, the Supreme Court made the following
observations:

> "9. We are in full agreement with what has been laid down by this Court.
> Whilst considering the possibility of likelihood of deception or confusion,
> in present times and particularly in the field of medicines, the Courts must
> also keep in mind the fact that nowadays the field of medicine is of an
> international character. The Court has to keep in mind the possibility that
> with the passage of time, 11 2001 PTC 300 (SC)  63 ::: Downloaded on -
> 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D some conflict may
> occur between the use of the mark by the Applicant in India and the user by
> the overseas company. The Court must ensure that public interest is in no
> way imperiled. Doctors particularly eminent doctors, medical practitioners
> and persons or Companies connected with medical field keep abreast of latest
> developments in medicine and preparations worldwide. Medical literature is
> freely available in this country. Doctors, medical practitioners and persons
> connected with the medical field regularly attend medical conferences,
> symposiums, lectures etc. It must also be remembered that nowadays goods are
> widely advertised in newspapers, periodicals, magazines and other media
> which is available in the country. This results in a product acquiring a
> worldwide reputation. Thus, if a mark in respect of a drug is associated
> with the Respondents worldwide it would lead to an anomalous situation if an
> identical mark in respect of a similar drug is allowed to be sold in India.
> However one note of caution must be expressed. Multinational corporations,
> who have no intention of coming to India or introducing their product in
> India should not be allowed to throttle an Indian Company by not permitting
> it to sell a product in India, if the Indian Company has genuinely adopted
> the mark and developed the product and is first in the market. Thus the
> ultimate test should be who is first in the market.

> 10\. In the present case, the marks are the same.

> They are in respect of pharmaceutical products. The mere fact that the
> Respondents (Allergan - Plaintiff)have not been using the mark in India
> would be irrelevant if they were first in the world market. The Division
> Bench had relied upon material which prima-facie shows that the Respondents
> (Defendant - Milment) product was advertised before the Appellants entered
> the field.

64 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D On the basis of that material the Division
> Bench has concluded that the Respondents were first to adopt the mark. If
> that be so then no fault can be found with the conclusion drawn by the
> Division Bench."

42\. We are in agreement with the view expressed by the learned Single Judge
in the order of reference that if the defence of prior user can be a good
defence in passing-off action as held in Milment Oftho Industries v. Allergen
Inc. (supra), there is no reason why it should not be available as a defence
in an infringement action where the Defendant is able to show fraudulent
nature of the registration of the Plaintiff's trade mark. As observed by the
Supreme Court in Milment Oftho Industries's case, the Court must keep in mind
the fact that now-a-days, the field of medicine is of an international
character. Doctors, particularly eminent Doctors, medical practitioners and
persons or Companies connected with medical field keep abreast of latest
developments in medicine preparations worldwide. Medical literature is freely
available in this country. Doctors and medical practitioners and persons
connected with the medical field regularly attend medical conferences,
symposiums, lectures, etc. Goods are widely advertised in newspapers,
periodicals, magazines, and on the internet. This results in a product
acquiring a worldwide reputation in a very short time. If the trade mark in
respect of a medicine is associated with the Defendant worldwide, it would
lead to an anomalous situation if an identical mark in respect of a similar
medicine is allowed to be sold in India only on the ground that the Plaintiff
got it registered in India first. The ultimate test should be who is first in
the market.

65 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

43\. It is true that the Plaintiff's argument is that registration of a trade
mark is done after following the procedure prescribed under the Trade Marks
Act and that if the Defendant wanted to raise any objection against the
Plaintiff's mark, an opportunity was available to the Defendant when the
plaintiff's application was advertised by the Registrar of Trade Marks and an
opportunity was given to the world at large to raise an objection to the grant
of registration of the trade mark in favour of the Plaintiff. We are of the
view that it is precisely because of that reason that there is a strong
presumption in favour of the validity of a registered trade mark and at an
interlocutory stage in a suit for infringement action, the Civil Court will
not easily doubt the validity of the registration of the Plaintiff's trade
mark. Even where the Defendant has taken rectification proceedings before the
Appellate Board, the Civil Court will not treat it as a sufficient ground for
refusing the grant of an ad-

interim injunction in favour of the Plaintiff. But having said so, it is
difficult to accept the Plaintiff's contention that the Court is barred from
considering the Defendant's plea about fraudulent nature of the Plaintiff's
registered trade mark or where the registration of the Plaintiff's trade mark
bears the mark of invalidity on its forehead.

For instance, in Corn Products Refining Company v. Shangrila Foods Products
Limited, the Supreme Court held that the words like "Glucose Biscuits" or
"Gluco biscuits" are ordinary dictionary words in which no one has any right.

66 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                  AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
                                                                                      
         44.            In   the   case   of  Lowenbrau   AG   and   Anr.      v.    Jagpin 
    

Breweries Ltd. & Anr.12, the plaintiff therein had filed a suit in respect of
infringement of its trademark LOWEN BRAU AG. The plaintiff moved for interim
relief. The defendants opposed the grant of relief by contending that the
registration was in violation of Section 9(1) of the Act. The defendants
contended that the word 'LOWEN BRAU' was widely used by several manufacturers
of beer in Germany and the mark was not distinctive. The defendants contended
that the Court in Germany had also not granted the claim of plaintiff claiming
exclusive right to use the mark. The learned Single Judge of the Delhi High
Court, after considering the provisions of the Act, held as under :

> "11. Section 28 of the Act while referring to rights conferred on
> registration begins with the words "registration of trade-marks shall, if
> valid, .....". Rights under Section 28 flow when the registration of the
> mark is valid. Registration is only prima facie evidence of its validity
> (Refer, P.M. Diesels Pvt. Ltd. versus Thukral Mechanical Works reported in
> AIR 1988 Del. 282).

14\. In view of Section 124(5) of the Act, this Court is competent to
adjudicate and decide the interlocutory application for injunction. While
deciding the interlocutory application in view of language of Sections 28 and
124 of the Act, the Court is competent to take prima facie view on the
question of validity of registration of the mark in favour of either side.
Merely because the mark is registered, injunction will not automatically
follow, when validity of registration is questioned in the 12 2009 (39) PTC
627  67 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D written statement/ pleadings. While deciding whether
injunction should be granted or not, a tentative view is required to be taken
on the question of validity of registration and principles for grant of
injunction applied. However, final decision on validity of registration is to
be taken by the authorities and not by the civil court. Registration is prima
facie regarded as valid but mere registration alone is not conclusive and is
not binding on the civil court when the application for injunction is
considered and decided. Onus however, will be on the party which questions
validity of registration to show that the registration is prima facie and
tentatively bad or invalid.

16\. (The said section 31) has to read harmoniously with Sections 28 and 124
of the Act. At the stage of interim application the court is required to
examine question of validity. Registration is prima facie evidence of validity
but not conclusive even at this stage. Sub-section 2 to Section 31 of the Act,
stipulates that registration of the mark will not be held to be invalid on the
ground that the mark could not have been registered under Section 9 of the Act
except upon evidence of distinctiveness and there was failure to submit such
evidence before the Registrar, provided evidence is filed in the legal
proceedings to prove that the mark had acquired distinctiveness on the date of
registration. Legal proceedings will include Suits filed by the registered
owner of the mark against third parties. Section 32 of the Act, states that if
a mark stands registered contrary to Section 9(1) of the Act and registration
is bad for lack of distinctiveness on the date of registration, the party can
defend the challenge by showing that they have acquired a distinctive
character after registration but before commencement of the legal proceedings.
These sections also show that question of distinctiveness can be examined at
the stage of grant of interim injunction by the courts."

68 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

45\. In the case of Gufic Ltd. v. Clinique Laboratories13, the plaintiff
therein had filed a suit in respect of infringement of its trademark
'CLINIQUE'. An ex-parte injunction was granted in favour of the plaintiff. An
application for vacating the injunction was moved by the defendants. It was
the case of the defendants that they were using mark 'CLINIQUE' for which they
held a registration and, therefore, they could not be injuncted. The plaintiff
countered this case of the defendant by contending that the trademark
'CLINIQUE' held by the defendants could not have been granted and it was bad
in law and was liable to be ignored for the purpose of interim orders. The
learned Single Judge of Delhi High Court rejected the arguments of the
defendants that since the mark 'CLINIQUE' was registered in their favour, the
Court could not go beyond the registration at the interlocutory stage. The
learned Judge observed as under :

> "8. In my view, Section 29 of the Act providing for infringement of the
> registered trademark does not contemplate infringement by another registered
> proprietor. Section 29(1), (2) and (4) expressly provide that 'registered
> trademark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered
> proprietor.......'. Though Section 29(5) which has been newly introduced in
> the 1999 Act does not use the same language but in my view the same would be
> irrelevant for the present purposes.

Section 30(2)(e) further fortifies the said position by expressly providing
that the registered trademark is not infringed where the use being as one of
two or more trademarks registered under the Act which are identical or nearly
resemble each other and in exercise of the 13 2010 (43) PTC 788 (Del.) (DB)
69 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
right to use of that trademark given by registration thereof. However,
Sections 28(3), 29 and 30(2)(e) cannot be read in isolation. If the intent was
that there could be no action for infringement against the registered
proprietor, the legislature while giving the right for rectification before
the registrar would not have in section 31 made the registration as only prima
facie evidence of validity thereof. If that had been the intention all that
would have been said is that as long as the registration exists it is valid,
without any question of prima facie or not. Then the courts would have had to
wait for the outcome of the rectification proceedings."

Though the facts in this case were different in as much as it was the case of
the plaintiff to grant an interim relief in their favour, but the position of
law urged for that purpose was the same which is involved in the present
reference, namely, whether the Court could, at the interlocutory stage, go
beyond the registration.

The learned single Judge while issuing interlocutory order, prima facie
adjudicated the validity of the registration and held that there was no need
to read Section 124(5) in a restrictive manner.

46\. One more case where the Delhi High Court has taken a view regarding the
prima facie validity of the registration is of Marico Limited v. Agro Tech
Foods Limited.14 In this case, the plaintiff held registration of two
trademarks 'LOSORB' and 'LO- SORB'. The trademarks were in respect of edible
oil. The defendant was packaging its products with the words 'WITH LOWABSORB
14 (2010) (43) PTC 39 (Del)  70 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::
Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D TECHNOLOGY'. The plaintiff alleged infringement
of its trademark by the defendant, and filed a suit. The plaintiff took out an
application for interlocutory relief, which was opposed by the defendant. One
of the contentions raised by the defendant was that registration of the
trademark was bad in law and, therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to any
injunction. An ex-parte interim-relief was granted in favour of the plaintiff
which was later on vacated by the learned Single Judge. The plaintiff
challenged the order denying interim relief to it, by way of an appeal before
the Division Bench. Before the Division Bench, issues arose as to whether the
factum of registration gave exclusive right to use the trademark, and whether
the registration constitutes only prima facie validity, and whether the Court
can deny injunction in spite of the registration. The Division Bench
crystallized these issues and answered them as under :

> "13. ...... Registration is only prima facie evidence of its validity and
> the presumption of prima facie validity of registration is only a rebuttable
> presumption, see para 31 of N.R. Dongre Vs. Whirlpool Corp. 1995 (34) DRJ
> 109 (DB).

> 14\. ...... The learned Single Judge was fully entitled to look into the
> aspect of validity of registration in the facts of the present case by
> reference to the expression "if valid"

> as occurring in Section 28 and the related provisions of Section 31 and the
> different sub-sections of Section 124. The learned Single Judge applied his
> mind and considered this issue of prima facie validity of registration of
> trademark for deciding the interlocutory application and which is very much
> permissible and in fact so provided under Section 124(5).

71 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

> 21\. The following conclusions thus emerge:

> (i) .....

> (ii) .....

> (iii) A civil court in a suit filed for infringement of a registered trade
> mark is entitled (if there is no earlier judgment which has achieved
> finality in cancellation proceedings) to consider the validity of
> registration for the purpose of passing an interlocutory order including of
> grant or refusal of an interim injunction- once the objection as to
> invalidity of registration is taken up in the pleading/written statement.

> (iv) ......

> (v) ......

> Even if there is finality to registration of a trade mark, yet the defendant
> in infringement action can take statutory defences under Sections 30 to 35
> to defeat the infringement action."

47\. In the case of S.M. Dye Chem v. Candbury (India) Ltd.15 the parameters of
grant of injunction in cases relating to trademark fell for consideration to
the Apex Court. The case arose from the suit filed by the plaintiff S.M. Dye
Chem in Gujrat High Court in respect of its trademark 'PIKNIK'. The defendant
Cadbury (India) Ltd. used the mark 'PIKNIK' for its chocolates. S.M. Dye Chem
gave notice for infringement and passing off and thereafter filed a suit
against Cadbury. An application for interim relief was taken out. The Trial
Court granted temporary injunction in favour of the plaintiff. An appeal was
filed by the defendant. In appeal, the High Court reversed the decision and
set aside the order of 15 (2000) 5 SCC 573  72 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014
23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D temporary injunction. In the
appeal by the Plaintiff, after considering the rival contentions, the Apex
Court culled out the issues for determination as under:

> "10. On these contentions, the following points arise for consideration:

> (1) Whether the defendant could, in the present interlocutory proceedings,
> based on infringement and passing off, raise any defence that the
> registration of plaintiff's mark was itself "invalid" because the
> plaintiff's mark did not satisfy the ingredients of clauses (a) to (e) of
> section 9(1) and was, in particular, not "distinctive" as required by
> section 9(1)(e)?

> (2) For grant of temporary injunction, should the Court go by principle of
> prima facie case (apart from balance of convenience) or comparative strength
> of the case of either parties or by finding out if the plaintiff has raised
> a 'triable issue'?

> 18\. In our view, any decision on the question of `validity' of the
> appellant's trade raised as a defence in the present application filed under
> Order 39 Rule 1 CPC will seriously jeopardise a decision on the same issue
> now pending in the rectification proceedings filed by the respondent in the
> Bombay High Court. We would therefore not go into the question of 'validity'
> or 'distinctiveness' of the plaintiff's trade mark nor into the
> applicability of National Bell Co. Case ( 1970(3) SCC

> 665) as those issues are to be decided in the rectification proceedings. We
> are of the view that the case before us can be disposed of by considering
> whether there is prima facie any deception and hence infringement and
> whether there is any 'passing off'. Points 1, 2 and 3 are therefore not
> decided.

73 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

> Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

> 19\. This point deals with the principles applicable for grant of temporary
> injunction in trade mark cases. Before American Cyanamid Co,. vs. Ethicon
> Ltd. ( 1975(1) ALL E.R. 504(HL), it was customary for the Courts to go into
> prima facie case in trade mark cases for grant or refusal of temporary
> injunction. But in American Cyanamid, it was observed that it was sufficient
> if a "triable issue" was presented by the plaintiff and the merits need not
> be gone into. The said judgment was referred to by this Court in Wander Ltd.
> Vs. Antox India (P) Ltd. ( 1990 Supple. SCC

> 727). The judgment in Wander Ltd. was followed in Power Control Appliances
> Vs. Sumeet Machines (P)Ltd.

> ( 1994(2) SCC 448). But in Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. Vs. Coca Cola Co. (
> 1995(5) SCC 545), this Court again adverted to the prima facie case
> principle while granting temporary injunction."

48\. While dismissing the appeal of Plaintiff in S.M. Dye Chem, the Apex Court
kept the issue of validity or distinctiveness open observing that those are to
be decided in the rectification proceedings. The Apex Court disposed of the
appeal by considering whether there was any prima facie case of infringement
and whether there was any passing off. Point Nos.1, 2 and 3 were not decided.
Dr.Tulzapurkar contended that the Apex Court could not go into the validity
and distinctiveness as according to it, those issues have to be considered in
the rectification proceedings and not by the Court. However, the decision of
the Apex Court cannot be read in a manner suggested by Dr.Tulzapurkar and a
principle of law cannot be culled out from these observations. The Apex Court
found that the appeal could be disposed of by considering the issue of prima
facie case and  74 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D therefore it did not consider the other points posed
for consideration. Since the rectification proceedings were pending, the Apex
Court did not go into the question of validity, but that does not mean that
the Apex Court laid down a proposition of law that the validity can only be
considered in rectification proceedings. The Apex Court only stated that the
issues 'are' to be decided in the rectification proceedings and did not state
the issues 'have' to be decided in the rectification proceedings. According to
Mr.Kadam, the perusal of these observations of the Apex Court would indicate
that the Apex Court could go into the question of validity but it chose not to
do so. He submitted that the observations nowhere indicate that the Court is
disentitled from examining the validity, except in rectification proceedings.
We find considerable substance in the submissions of Mr.Kadam.

49\. Reliance was placed by Dr.Tulzapurkar on the case of the Division Bench
of Delhi High Court in the case of P.M.Dissels Pvt.

Ltd. v. Thukral Mechanical Works.16 In this case the plaintiff was a
registered proprietor of the trademark 'FIELD MARSHAL' The plaintiff had filed
a suit against the defendant in respect of infringement of its trademark. The
defendant had also obtained registration of trademark 'FIELD MARSHAL'. The
plaintiff had filed an application for cancellation of defendant's
registration. The Court observed in paragraphs 7, 13 and 17 as under :

    
    
    
    
         16 AIR 1988 Delhi 282
    
                                                                                                    75
    
    
    
                                                            ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::
          Uday                                                                   AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    

"7. The main question which would, therefore, arise for consideration at this
stage is whether notwithstanding the application of the plaintiff for
cancellation/rectification of the aforesaid trade mark, which has now been
filed against the defendants, can the plaintiff ask for the grant of or for
the continuance of an interim injunction restraining the registered proprietor
of a trade mark from using that trade mark.

13\. The perusal of the aforesaid provision (of sections 28 and 31 of the
Trade Marks Act, 1958) clearly shows that an exclusive right to the use of the
trade mark has been given to the registered proprietor by Section 28(1) in
relation to the goods in respect of which the trade mark is registered. It is
the registered proprietor who is also given the right to obtain relief in
respect of the infringement of the trade mark. It is true that Section 28(1)
confers the right on the registered proprietor if the registration is valid.
This provision has, therefore, to be read along with Section 31(1) which,
inter alia, provides that the registration of the trade mark shall be the
prima facie evidence of the validity thereof. Reading the two provisions
together, namely Section 28(1) and Section 31(1), the implication would be
that as long as a trade mark stands registered in the name of a proprietor,
the said registration shall be deemed to be valid and the registered
proprietor would have an exclusive right to use the said trade mark. If the
registration is cancelled by an action being taken under Section 56 of the
Act, then the protection and right afforded under Section 28(1) read with
Section 31(1) would no longer be available, but till the Register of Trade
Mark is corrected and the name of a person holding a trade mark is deleted,
that person who is shown as the proprietor of the registered trade mark would
continue to have all the rights and privileges which are conferred by the Act
on the registered owner of the trade mark. Therefore, even though the
plaintiff has filed an application in this Court being C.O. 6/87 for
rectification of the Trade Mark Register for deletion of the  76 :::
Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D name of
the defendants there from, the registration of the trade mark in the name of
the defendants is prima face evidence of the validity thereof because of the
provisions of Section 31(1).

17 .... Again there is no interim relief granted in that suit. The defendants
who are registered proprietor of the trade mark are entitled to use that trade
mark till the registration stands. These rights have been conferred on the
defendants by virtue of provisions of Section 28 of the Act even though the
marks may be similar."

Based on these observations it was contended that the prima facie validity
means mark is valid till it is set aside. If that was to be so, there was no
need to use the prefix 'prima facie'. Every right is valid till it is set
aside but in the present statute the legislature has chosen to employ the word
'prima facie' before such a right.

50\. In Aravind Laboratories v. V.A. Samy Chemical Works,17 the registration
of trade mark in favour of the plaintiff was more than seven years old and,
therefore, the Court applied section 32 of the Trade Marks Act, 1958 that the
registration is to be conclusive as to validity after seven years. After seven
years, the registration can be questioned only on the ground that the original
registration was obtained by fraud. However, the defendant had failed to
institute rectification proceedings on the ground that the registration of the
plaintiff's trade mark was not valid. Hence, the Court did not allow the
defendant to raise the plea in the plaintiff's suit for infringement 17 AIR
1987 Madras 265  77 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D that the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark
was invalid and held that the plaintiff is entitled to market his product in
the registered trade mark as long as he continues to be the registered
proprietor of the said trade mark.

51\. In Carter & Parker Ld. vs. Scotia Wools Ltd., 18 Cross, J.

observed as under:

> "It does seem to me that as long as there is on the Register a trade mark
> ..... however wrongly it may be there - I do not know what the rights or
> wrongs of that are - it is not desirable that other people should use what
> is substantially exactly the same trade description."

> In this case, however, the Court dismissed the motion for rectification
> filed by the defendant as misconceived. The Court merely held that in
> interlocutory proceedings, cross-motion for expunging the plaintiff's trade
> mark is not maintainable.

52\. In Edwards v. Dennis - Re: Edwards' Trade Mark,19 the Court observed as
under:

> "Now, although he does not carry on the business of making and selling
> galvanised wire, he rests his case almost entirely upon the Trade-marks
> Registration Act, 1875. In the first place, what is the object of that Act?
> Speaking generally, its object is, not to give new rights, but to place 18
> (1960) Vol.8 Reports of Patent, Design & Trade Mark Cases 206 19 Chancery
> Division vol. XXX 1885 Court of Appeal 454  78 ::: Downloaded on -
> 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D restrictions on the
> bringing of actions for infringement of trade-marks by requiring that a
> trade-mark shall be registered before any action to prevent its infringement
> can be brought. That is provided for by the 1st section of the Act as
> amended by the subsequent Act of 1876. Another object of the Act is to
> facilitate evidence of title to trade-marks by means of registration; for
> the 3rd section of the Act provides that registration of a person as first
> proprietor of a trade-mark shall be prima facie evidence of his right to the
> exclusive use of the trade-mark, and that five years' registration shall be
> conclusive evidence of his right to such exclusive use."

> In Apollinaris Company v. Herrfeldt and Campbell,20 the Court emphasised
> that the purpose of the Trade Marks Act is to do away, to a great extent,
> with the necessity of proving user by a plaintiff having a registered trade
> mark, and observed:

> "In my opinion if a Defendant desires to avail himself of that defence and
> to show that the trade mark, though on the register, ought not to have been
> there and could not properly have been registered as a trade mark, he ought
> to raise that point by a motion to take the mark off the register, and that
> has been so decided although Mr. Aston thought it had not been. I stated in
> the course of the arguments that that question did not arise 20 18 Reports
> of Patent, Design & Trade Mark Vol.IV 478  79 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014
> 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D here in my opinion, and I so
> think because it does not lie on the Plaintiffs to show that in fact they
> had used it. If the Defendants desired to contest its being a good trade
> mark, it was for them to show that it had never been so used, if the
> propriety of the trade mark being registered depended on that. I also
> express my opinion, that in order to raise such a defence the Defendant must
> himself move to take the mark off the register. If he does so, and if it is
> taken off the register, of course the Plaintiff loses his trade mark, but if
> it has been on the register for more than five years, in my opinion, in the
> absence of such a motion, a Plaintiff, having his trade mark on the
> register, is entitled to ask the Court to protect him in the enjoyment of
> that trade mark.

> That is the substance of the Act which provides that after five years it
> shall be sufficient evidence of his title to the mark as a trade mark."

> 53\. In the above two cases, the Court laid emphasis on the provisions of
> the English Act which provides that after five years of the trademark having
> been on the register, it shall be sufficient evidence of the registered
> proprietor's title to the mark as a Trademark. There is no such provision in
> the Trademarks Act, 1999.

The English Court merely stated that to raise the challenge to the validity of
a registered Trademark, the Defendant ought to raise that point by a motion to
take the mark off the register i.e. by filing rectification proceeding in the
same Court. The Court did not have to deal with the contention whether in a
suit for infringement of Trademark, the question of invalidity can be examined
as a prima facie case in an interlocutory proceeding.

80 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

    
    
           Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
         54.          In Corn   Products   Refining   Co.    v.  Shangrila   Food 
    
    
    
    
                                                                                     
    

Products Ltd.,21 the respondent (manufacturer of biscuits) applied for
registration of the mark "Gluvita" in November 1949. The respondent agreed to
limit the registration to biscuits only which was the only class of goods
specified in class 30. The appellant, an American Company, organised under the
laws of New Jersey, contended that it had registered the mark "Glucovita"
under the Trade Marks Act in USA in class 30 in respect of "Dextrose (d-

Glucose powder mixed with vitamins), a substance used as food or as an
ingredient in food; glucose for food. The appellant opposed the respondent's
application for registration. The Deputy Registrar granted registration for
the respondent's trade mark "Gluvita". The appellant preferred an appeal to
the Bombay High Court from the order of the Deputy Registrar. The Single Judge
of the High Court set aside the order of the Deputy Registrar and held that
the respondent's mark could not be registered in view of section 8(a) of the
Act. The respondent appealed from the judgment before the Division Bench. The
Division Bench allowed the appeal and restored the order of the Deputy
Registrar. Hence, the appellant appealed before the Supreme Court. The Supreme
Court accepted the view of the Single Judge of the High Court and held that
words like 'Glucose Biscuits', 'Gluco biscuits' and 'Glucoa Lactine biscuits'
are ordinary dictionary words in which no one has any right. They are really
not marks with a common element or elements. Glucose is used in the
manufacture of biscuits. That would establish a trade 21 1959 PTC (Suppl) (1)
13 (SC) = AIR 1960 SC 142  81 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D connection between the two commodities, namely,
glucose manufactured by the appellant and the biscuits produced by the
respondent. An average purchaser would therefore be likely to think that the
respondent's 'Gluvita biscuits' were made with the appellant's 'Glucovita'
glucose. The Court further held that the test of trade connection between
different goods would apply where the competing marks closely resemble each
other.

55\. We are, therefore, of the view that while the registered proprietor of a
trade mark would ordinarily be entitled to finding of the Civil Court in its
favour that the trade mark registered in its name is prima facie valid, the
jurisdiction of the Court is not barred for considering the plea of the
Defendant at the interlocutory stage that the registration in the Plaintiff's
favour is so fraudulent or is so apparently invalid that the Court should not
grant an injunction in favour of the Plaintiff. Of course, a very heavy burden
lies on the Defendant to rebut the strong presumption in favour of the
Plaintiff at the interlocutory stage. The Civil Court obviously cannot give
any final finding on this question as the jurisdiction to give such final
finding is conferred on Appellate Board in the rectification proceedings, but
it is not possible to accept the Plaintiff's contention that at the
interlocutory stage the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is completely barred.

82 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D

56\. The Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in Marico Limited v. Agro Tech
Foods Limited (supra) has also held that since as per Section 31 the
registration is only a prima facie evidence of the validity of the
registration, it is open to the Court to go into the question of tentative
validity of the registration while considering the application for grant of
injunction. Of course, the onus lies on the person who challenges the validity
of the mark and he will have to establish that the registration of trade mark
in favour of the proprietor thereof is prima facie or tentatively not valid.

57\. Even while agreeing with the aforesaid view of the Delhi High Court, we
do find considerable substance in the submissions of Dr.Tulzapurkar, learned
Counsel for the plaintiff, that at the interlocutory stage the Court is not
required to call upon the plaintiff to prove that the registration of his
trade mark is not invalid, In view of the scheme of the Act that the
application of the applicant for registration of the trade mark is required to
be advertised with an opportunity to the world at large to submit opposition
to such application and the Registrar grants opportunity to lead evidence and
opportunity of hearing to the applicant as well as the opponent and thereafter
decides the application and grants registration, there will be a strong
presumption in favour of the plaintiff. Hence, at the interlocutory stage, the
Civil Court is not to embark upon and evolve factual inquiry, but the Civil
Court hearing  83 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday
AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D the application for interim injunction to restrain
the defendant from using the trade mark registered in the plaintiff's name, is
only permitted to consider whether the registration is totally illegal or
fraudulent or shocks the conscience of the Court. It is not sufficient for the
defendant resisting the application for interim injunction to show that the
defendant has an arguable case for showing invalidity of the trade mark
registered in the name of the plaintiff. Such "low threshold prima facie case"
may be sufficient for the defendant to get an opportunity under Section 124(1)
and (2) of the 1999 Act to get the trial of the suit stayed for the purpose of
enabling the defendant to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification. Such
prima facie satisfaction of the Civil Court at the lower threshold will not be
sufficient to refuse interim injunction in favour of the plaintiff who has
filed the suit for infringement. But if the defendant is able to show, without
Civil Court being required to embark upon detailed inquiry, that the
registration granted in favour of the plaintiff is totally illegal or
fraudulent or such which shocks the conscience of the Court , the Civil Court
will refuse to grant interim injunction.

58\. Before parting, it is clarified that the observations made in this
judgment are for the limited purpose of deciding the question referred to us.

84 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

    
    
          Uday                                                                 AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
                                            CONCLUSIONS
    
    
    
    
                                                                                    
    

59\. In a nutshell, our conclusions are as under:

(1) The expression 'if valid' in section 28 and the words 'prima facie
evidence of the validity of the trade mark' in section 31 of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999 (the Act) must be given their plain and natural meaning. The plain
and natural meaning is given to these phrases by various High Courts.

    
    
                              ig                    (paras 24, 26, 29, 31, 35, 44 & 56)
    
    
         (2)    Though the object of providing registration of trade mark is to 
                            
    

obviate the difficulty in proving each and every case the plaintiff's title to
the trade mark, the object is achieved by raising a strong presumption in law
to the validity of the registration of the trade mark and heavy burden is cast
on the defendant to question the validity of the trade mark.

(Paras 34, 43, 55 & 57) (3) A challenge to the validity of the registration of
the trade mark can finally succeed only in rectification proceedings before
the Intellectual Property Appellate Board. However, there is no express or
implied bar taking away the jurisdiction and power of the Civil Court to
consider the challenge to the validity of the trade mark at the interlocutory
stage by way of prima facie finding.

    
    
                                                                            (Paras 34 and 53)
    
    
                                                                                                    85
    
    
    
                                                            ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::
           Uday                                                                     AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
         (4)     There   is   nothing   in   the   Act   to   suggest   that   any   different  
    
    
    
    
                                                                                         
    

parameters for grant of injunction are required to be applied when a plaintiff
seeks injunction on the basis of registered trade mark. The relief of
injunction being a relief in equity, when the Court is convinced that the
grant of interim injunction would lead to highly inequitable results, Court is
not powerless to refuse such relief.

(Paras 35, 36 & 47) (5) However, a very heavy burden lies on the defendants to
rebut the strong presumption in favour of the plaintiff on the basis of the
registration at the interlocutory stage. The plaintiff is not required to
prove that the registration of a trade mark is not invalid, but only in the
cases where the factum of registration is ex facie totally illegal or
fraudulent or shocks the conscience of the Court that the Court may decline to
grant relief in favour of the plaintiff.

(Paras 25, 27 & 55) (6) It is not sufficient for the defendant to show that
the defendant has an arguable case for showing invalidity. The prima facie
satisfaction of the Court to stay the trial under section 124 of the Act is
not enough to refuse grant of interim injunction. It is only in exceptional
circumstances, such as, the registration being ex facie illegal or fraudulent
or which shocks the conscience of the Court that Court will refuse the interim
injunction in favour of the registered proprietor of the trade mark. (Para 57)
86 ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 ::: Uday AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
(7) The Division Bench in the case of Maxheal Pharmaceuticals considered it as
the view of Vimadalal, J.

that it is "the practice of this Court" to grant injunction to the holder of a
registered trade mark. However, there was no sound footing for the Division
Bench to recognize it as a long-

standing practice of this Court.

(Para 33) (8) Though it is considered as a practice of this Court in granting
injunction in favour of the plaintiff having a registered trade mark, the same
cannot be treated as a total embargo on the power of the Court to refuse grant
of interim injunction. In exceptional cases, that is in cases of registration
of trade mark being ex facie illegal, fraudulent or such as to shock the
conscience of the Court, the Court would be justified in refusing to grant
interim injunction.

(Para 33) (9) As regards the controversy at hand, the provisions of the Trade
Marks Act, 1999 are not comparable with the provisions of the Designs Act,
2000 and the Patent Act, 1970.

    
    
                                                                                      (Paras 37 and 38)
    
    
    
    
                                                                                                          87
    
    
    
                                                                  ::: Downloaded on - 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::
           Uday                                                           AppL674.2012-23.12.2014-D
    
    
    
    
    

60\. The question posed for consideration in the reference:

"Whether the Court can go into the question of the validity of the
registration of the plaintiff's trade mark at an interlocutory stage when the
defendant takes up the defence of invalidity of the registration of the
plaintiff's trade mark in an infringement suit?" is answered thus:

In cases where the registration of trade mark is ex facie illegal, fraudulent
or shocks the conscience of the Court, the Court is not powerless to refuse to
grant an injunction, but for establishing these grounds, a very high threshold
of prima facie proof is required.

It is, therefore, open to the Court to go into the question of validity of
registration of plaintiff's trade mark for this limited purpose, to arrive at
a prima facie finding.

(CHIEF JUSTICE) (S.J. KATHAWALLA, J.) (N.M. JAMDAR, J.)  88 ::: Downloaded on
- 26/12/2014 23:46:24 :::

