

Andhra High Court

T.V. Venugopal vs Ushodaya Enterprises And Anr. on 29 December, 2000

Equivalent citations: 2001 (2) ALT 42

Author: G Bikshapathy

Bench: G Bikshapathy

JUDGMENT G. Bikshapathy, J.

1\. Both the C.C.C. As. can be disposed of by a common judgment, as they arise
out of the judgment and decree passed in O.S. No. 555 of 1999 on the file of
the learned II Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad, dated
24-7-2000.

2\. Ushodaya Enterprises Limited, a Public Limited Company incorporated under
the Companies Act, having its registered office at Hyderabad filed the suit in
O.S. No. 555 of 1999 under Section 26 and Order VII Rule 1 of Code of Civil
Procedure, Sections 55 and 62 of the Copyright Act, Sections 27, 105 and 106
of The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, seeking the following reliefs:

(a) For a permanent injunction restraining the Defendants, their servants,
agents or anyone claiming through any of them from passing off their
Agarbathis business as the business of the plaintiff by using the expression
Eenadu or any other expression phonetically and/ or visually similar or
deceptively similar to the plaintiff's mark, AND/OR by applying the artistic
script Eenadu annexed to the plaint either as part of their Corporate name or
using the name otherwise in the course of their business transaction viz., in
their correspondence, letterheads, name boards, sign boards, advertisements in
print and electronic media and in such other business/trade literature in
conducting their business, thereby pass off their business and service as the
business and service of the plaintiff and/or enable others to pass off.

(b) For a direction to the Defendants, their men, agents, representatives,
servants or any one claiming through them to surrender all printed matter
lying with them or in their custody, including wrappers, cartons, packing
material, name boards, banners, business forms, letterheads, visiting cards
and other articles or stationery containing or consisting the offending
trademark Eenadu and copyright Eenadu together with all blocks, dies, rubber
stamps, photos negatives and the like containing or consisting the offending
Trademark Eenadu and the Copyright Eenadu together with all blocks, dies,
rubber stamps, photos negatives and the like containing or consisting the
offending Trademark Eenadu and the Copyright Eenadu.

3\. Defendant No. l is one T.V. Venugopal, trading as Ashika Incense Inc.
incorporated at Bangalore. The 2nd defendant is one Mr. R. Lokesh.

4\. The learned trial Court decreed the suit with costs by a judgment and
decree dated 24-7-2000. Aggrieved by the said judgment and decree dated
24-7-2000, the defendants filed an appeal in C.M.A. (sic. CCC) No. 178 of
2000. However, aggrieved by the judgment and decree in so far as the relief of
injunction was confined to the Andhra Pradesh State, the plaintiff filed
appeal in C.C.C.A. No. 180 of 2000.

5\. It is necessary to refer to certain essential pleadings in the suit plaint
and counter for properly appreciating the matter. For the sake of convenience,
the parties as they are arrayed in the suit are referred to herein.

6\. It is the case of the plaintiff that it is the publisher of Telugu Daily
Eenadu and Mr. Ramoji Rao is the Founder and Chairman of Eenadu and Margadarsi
group of companies and also Chief Editor of Eenadu Telugu Daily Newspaper.
This group of companies have various business interests in publications,
television broadcasting, Chit Funds, hotels, financial services, film
production and distribution and developing Film City etc. The first issue of
Eenadu daily newspaper was published on 10th August 1974 at Visakhapatnam. It
was registered with the Registrar of Newspapers. The business slowly spread
its roots in other Cities and it is now being published in 12 centres, most of
them are District Headquarters. The word Eenadu became the household name
among the people of Andhra Pradesh and the Telugu speaking public in the other
States and the rest of the world. It is the largest circulated Telugu daily
newspaper having more than 7.25 lakhs circulation per day. The plaintiff-
Company also owns a Eenadu Television. The newspaper and the Television use
the name Eenadu, which is written in a distinctive and novel artistic design.
It gained sufficient commercial goodwill. Eenadu is the trade mark of the
plaintiff which owns the newspaper and satellite television. It also owns a
copyright in the distinctive and novel artistic script. Thus, it is the case
of the plaintiff that it has built enormous trust, goodwill and confidence of
public. The defendant has been doing the business under the name and style of
Ashika Incense Inc. The 1st defendant has been applying the plaintiff's trade
mark Eenadu fraudulently on the carton of Agarbathis manufactured and sold by
him, he has been infringing the plaintiff's copyright in respect of the
artistic script Eenadu deliberately, consciously, dishonestly with a view to
confuse and mislead the consumers and passing off such Agarbathis as if they
are the products of Eenadu and Margadarsi group. Having come to know these
illegal acts, the plaintiff issued a notice dated 27-2-1995 requiring him to
desist from such activities. A reply was issued on 8-7-1995 by the defendants
asking for a copy of registration document while disputing the material
allegations. The plaintiff also published a caution notice in Eenadu newspaper
on 23-7-1995. Thereafter, the defendant had given up the sale of Agarbathis
with trademark Eenadu of the plaintiff. The plaintiff recently came to know
that he has resumed the activity again. The trademark appearing on the packets
is the exactly on the same of Eenadu of plaintiff and he has also infringed
the trademark of the plaintiff and it is alleged that the 1st defendant has
been using the mark Eenadu which is the same in all respects and the defendant
is passing off the product of the plaintiff and by deceiving and causing
confusion among the minds of the consumers.

7\. It is the case of the plaintiff that the artistic work was first published
by the 2nd defendant in 1993 knowing that the plaintiff was the owner of the
artistic work. The 2nd defendant is not the original owner of the artistic
work. The plaintiff had created the artistic script in the year 1974 through
one Mr. Swamy during the Course of employment for the use as mast head of the
paper. The plaintiff also got copyright registered under the Copyright Act.
The plaintiff states that trademark Eenadu has acquired distinct, long and
continuous use. The defendant has adopted the name of Eenadu for his
Agarbathis business to appropriate the success of commercial goodwill,
reputation of the name Eenadu by confusing and misleading the public viz.
Agarbathis is connected with the business of Eenadu and Margadarsi group
promoted by Mr. Ramoji Rao. The 1st defendant also made wrongful gain by
infringing the copyright of the plaintiff and by passing of the goods by use
of the plaintiff's trademark Eenadu. Therefore, the plaintiff claimed that the
1st defendant is liable to be injuncted from using the trademark Eenadu and
copyright in respect of artistic script Eenadu.

8\. In the written statement filed by the 1st Defendant they have denied
various averments made in the plaint. It is stated that the defendant was in
no way connected with business activities that are being carried on by the
plaintiff either as Eenadu or Eenadu-Margadarsi group. The business of
plaintiff comprises or publication, foods, television, and chit fund etc., but
not connected with incense sticks of Agarbathis. The word Eenadu has
dictionary meaning in Telugu and Kannada as "this time" "this land" and the
plaintiff cannot claim monopoly in respect of such a general descriptive word.
The plaintiff has not registered the trademark of the name Eenadu in the class
in which the incense sticks are included. The defendant has been in the
business of Agarbathis right from 1993. The plaintiff has obtained copyright
registration surreptitiously after coming to know about the copyright for the
artistic work which the defendant had first obtained from the competent
authorities. The defendants filed an application for registration for the
trademark Eenadu class-3 for incense sticks and it is pending and is in
advanced stage of registration and the plaintiff has not made any such
applications for registration of the trademark either in clause 3 or 61 where
newspapers are not included. The plaintiff's business is totally unrelated to
the goods manufactured by the defendants. The goodwill and reputation built by
the defendant in Agarbathis is confined only to the Agarbathis and incense
sticks and it no way affects the goodwill, reputation alleged to have been
built up by the plaintiff in newspapers and other business. There is no
question of misleading the public and for the last six years, he has been
doing the business to the knowledge of each and everybody. It is only after
the notice was issued on 27-2-1995, the plaintiff was called upon to furnish
the copyright particulars of registration. Thereafter, only the plaintiff
taken the steps to register the copyright for artistic work Eenadu. Plaintiff
has deliberately kept quite for more than four years giving an impression that
the defendant had given up the sale of Agarbathis with trademark after the
notice was issued by the plaintiff and that the sale of Agarbathis were
resumed just before filing of the suit. It is stated that the carton indicated
the trademark application number and it did not claim that the trademark has
been registered. The copyright registration was obtained by the plaintiff
subsequent to the copyright registration of the defendant. Further, it was
stated that the mark Eenadu was used by several other producers and by
different parties such as coffee powder, washing powder, matches, appalams,
ayurvedic soap, chilli powder, coconut oil etc. The defendant had been an
honest concurrent user under Section 12(3) of Trade and Merchandise Marks Act,
1958. Hence, the question of infringing the copyright of the plaintiff did not
arise. When the defendant and the plaintiff are engaged totally in unrelated
type of business, the goodwill gained by the plaintiff did not come in the way
of the defendants doing the business independently under its own banner Ashika
Inc. The word Ashika has been used as a prefix to the Eenadu and it is called
as Ashikavari Eenadu Agarbathis.

9\. Basing on the respective pleadings, the trial Court framed the following
issues:

(1) Whether the plaintiff-Company owns the copyright in the distinctive and
novel artistic script "Eenadu"?

(2) Whether the distinctive and novel artistic script 'Eenadu' of the
plaintiff-Company is the trademark of the plaintiff?

(3) Whether the defendant is passing off their Agarbathi (incense stick)
business as the business of the plaintiff by using the expression 'Eenadu' or
any other expression phonetically and/or visually similar or deceptively
similar to plaintiff's mark 'Eenadu' and or applying the artistic script as
depicted in para 3 of page 3 of the plaint and as annexed to the plaint?

(4) Whether this Court has got territorial jurisdiction to try this suit?

(5) Whether the defendant has adopted the artistic script of the plaintiff in
'Eenadu' and their trademark to pass off his Agarbathi business as that of the
plaintiff's goods?

(6) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for permanent injunction as prayed for?

(7) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for direction as prayed for?

(8) Whether the defendant is the owner of the copyright in the work as
appearing on defendant's Agarbathy cartons along with the word 'Eenadu'?

(9) To what relief?"

5 witnesses were examined on behalf of the plaintiff and Exs.A-1 and A-72 were
marked, while defendants examined six witnesses and Exs.B-1 to B-67 were
marked. Ex.X-1 to Ex.X-8 were marked through the witnesses, Who were examined
on behalf of the defendants.

10\. The evidence was adduced in support of their respective pleadings.

11\. The facts which are not in dispute are that the plaintiff-Company is
engaged in the publication of Telugu daily newspaper Eenadu and English
Newstime. It also deals in food products such as pickles, mineral water etc.
The plaintiff-Company owns a Telugu Television channel popularly known as EE
T.V. First Eenadu telugu newspaper was published on 10th August, 1974 at
Visakhapatnam with the artistic script of Eenadu in telugu. The said newspaper
was registered with the appropriate statutory authorities. The circulation
swelled from time to time and it has touched over 7.25 lakhs by June, 1999.
The mast head of the Eenadu newspaper is an artistic work marked as Ex.A-8. It
was created by one of the employees of Eenadu newspaper Mr. P. Swamy and this
artistic script is being used in various correspondences, identity cards etc.
It is not in dispute that apart from Eenadu newspaper, various other items are
also being produced by the plaintiff-Company. It obtained the certificate of
registration from the appropriate authority under Copyright Act for the
artistic work Ex.A-43 dated 9-7-1999 with the words in telugu script Eenadu.
The plaintiff has not been manufacturing or trading in Agarbathis. The
defendant is the manufacturers of incense sticks and has been selling from
1993 under various names viz., Ashikavari Eenadu Agarbathis, Eenadu Sandals,
Eenadu Durbar Agarbathi etc. The defendant registered the entire cartons of
Agarbathis with artistic work under the Copyright Act. It was earlier to the
registration by the plaintiff-Company. It is also not in dispute that the
plaintiff-Company has made an application for registration of trademark under
the provisions of the Trademarks Act under various classes, other than the
classes in which Agarbathis and incense sticks fall and it is in evidence that
the plaintiff-Company did not intend to enter into the product of Agarbathis
or incense sticks. On the other hand, it is in evidence that the defendant has
also made an application for registration of the trademark Eenadu in the class
3 of Schedule-IV to Trade and Merchandise Marks Rules in respect of the
incense sticks and the same is pending consideration before the appropriate
authorities. Thus the application of both the plaintiff and the defendants for
registration of the trademark is pending with the appropriate authority. But,
however, the applications are filed for different class of goods while the
application made by the plaintiff is for the goods other than the incense
sticks and the application made by the defendant is for incense sticks and
thus they travel in different angles. But, the filing of the application have
no serious bearing on the issues under consideration as the question of
alleged infringement of trademark under the provisions of the Trade Marks Act
does not arise and that will not be available to the plaintiff in view of
Section 27(1) of Trade Marks Act. In fact, the learned Counsel for the
plaintiff also fairly admitted that the main thrust of the grievance is
infringement of the Copyright Act and passing off action on the part of the
defendant of the incense sticks with the Trademark and Copyright of the mark
Eenadu. The learned Counsel for the defendant, however, submitted that
defendant has got prior registration under the Copyright Act. Further, there
is a vast difference between the artistic work of the defendant and the
artistic work of the plaintiff. He further submits that there is an inordinate
delay in filing the suit thereby the plaintiff acquiesced his right, if any,
to restrain the defendant from using artistic work.

12\. The issues that arise for consideration in the appeals is whether the
defendants' infringed the copyright registration obtained by the plaintiff?
(2) whether the plaintiff has been able to establish the infringement of
copyright under the provisions of the Copyright Act? (3) Whether the plaintiff
has established passing off goods by the defendant as if they are the goods of
the plaintiff? (4) If so, to what relief, the plaintiff is entitled?

13\. Mr. K.N. Srinivasan assisted by Mrs. Kalpana Ekbote appearing for the
Appellant/Defendant and Mr. N.A.K. Sharma assisted by Mr. Nalin Kumar referred
to numerous case law.

14\. Before we consider the issue relating to passing off action, it will be
convenient to consider whether the plaintiff has been able to establish
infringement of copyright of the plaintiff.

15\. It cannot be disputed that the defendant had registered the artistic work
on the entire carton of Agarbathis containing the words "Ashikavari Eenadu
Agarbathis" and the works on 14-3-1997 with Registration No. A-53813/97
Exs.B-10 to B-14. The applicant name was mentioned as T.V. Venugopal, a
subject of Indian Republic solely trading as Ashika incense inc. at Bangalore,
Karnataka State. In the extract from the Copyright Register the name of author
was mentioned as R. Lokesh (Suji Designs), Bangalore, (India). The entire
carton containing the artistic work of the logo Eenadu in Telugu and English
was registered. It was also mentioned there Ashikawari Eenadu Agarbathi. The
left side of the wrapper, it is mentioned as "two in one". There is also a
logo representing A.I.I. in a artistic design. Thus, it is seen that the
entire artistic work on the wrapper is registered under Copyright Act as early
as in 1997. It is also not in dispute that the Agarbathis are being exported
to foreign countries by the Ashika Incense Inc. Bangalore. On the side falps
of the wrappers name of Eenadu was written in Hindi, Tamil and Malayalam. The
Eenadu emblem is in Telugu as well as in English. On one side it is in Telugu
and on the other side it is in English in egg shape design in tri colour, red,
white and green. However, in respect of the copyright registered under the
Copyright Act by the plaintiff, it is only in Telugu version Eenadu and the
artistic work does not similar in design, which I deal with at a later stage.
But, in any event, it has to be seen both the defendant and the plaintiff have
got registered copyrights of Eenadu. But, however, in respect of the
defendant, the entire carton containing Ashikavari Eenadu Agarbathis was
registered with various other artistic work including logo whereas the
copyright of the plaintiff is only Eenadu in Telugu script.

16\. Certain provisions under the Copyright Act are necessary to be referred
for proper appreciation of the case. The word 'Artistic work' is defined under
Section 2(c) and 'infringing copy' is defined in 2(m), which read as follows:

"artistic work" means -

(i) a painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a diagram, map, chart or
plan), an engraving or a photograph, whether or not any such work possesses
artistic quality;

(ii) an architectural work of Article; and

(iii) any other work of artistic craftsmanship;"

2 (m) "infringing copy" means.-

(i) in relation to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a
reproduction thereof otherwise than in the form of a cinematrographic film;

(ii) in relation to a cinematdgraphic film, a copy of the film made on any
medium by any means;

(iii) in relation to a sound recording, any other recording embodying the same
sound recording, made by any means;

(iv) in relation to a programme or performance in which such a broadcast
reproduction right or a performer's right subsists under the provisions of
this Act, the sound recording or a cinematograp film of such programme or
performance, if such reproduction, copy of sound recording is made or imported
in contravention of the provisions of this Act;"

17\. Section 13 contains the works in which copyright subsists. It reads thus:

"13. Works in which copyright subsists - (1) Subject to the provisions of this
Section and the other provisions of this Act, copyright shall subsist
throughout India in the following classes of works, that is to say,-

(a) original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works;

(b) cinematograph films; and

(c) sound recording.

(2) Copyright shall not subsist in any work specified in Sub-section (1),
other than a work to which the provisions of Section 40 or Section 41 apply,
unless,-

(i) in the case of a published work, the work is first published in India, or
where the work is first published outside India, the author is at the date of
such publication, or in a case where the author was dead at that date, was at
the time of his death, a citizen of India;

(ii) in the case of an unpublished work other than work of architecture, the
author is at the date of the making of the work a citizen of India or
domiciled in India; and

(iii) in the case of work architecture, the work is located in India.

Explanation - In the case of a work of joint authorship, the conditions
conferring copyright specified in this Sub-section shall be satisfied by all
the authors of the work.

(3) Copyright shall not subsist-

(a) in any cinematograph film if a substantial part of the film is an
infringement of the copyright in any other work;

(b) in any sound recording made in respect of a literary, dramatic or musical
work, if in making the sound recording, copyright in such work has been
infringed.

(4) The copyright in a cinematograph film or a sound recording shall not
affect the separate copyright in any work in respect of which or a substantial
part of which, the film, or as the case may be, the sound recording is made.

(5) In the case of work architecture, copyright shall subsist only in the
artistic character and design and shall not extend to processes or methods of
construction.

18\. The meaning of 'Copyright' is explained in Section 14, which reads thus:

"14. Meaning of copyright - For the purposes of this Act, "copyright" means
the exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise
the doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any substantial
part thereof, namely-

(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer
programme,-

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in
any medium by electronic means;

(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;

(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;

(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;

(v) to make any translation of the work;

(vi) to make any adaptation of the work;

(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of
the acts specified in relation to the work in Sub-clauses (i) to (vi);

(b) xxxx

(c) in the case of an artistic work,-

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including depiction in three
dimensions of a two dimensional work or in two dimensions of a three
dimensional work;

(ii) to communicate the work to the public;

(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;

(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;

(v) to make any adaptation of the work;

(vi) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of the acts specified
in relation to the work in Sub-clauses (i) to (iv);

(d) xxxx"

But, however, under Chapter-Ill, the mode of registration of the copyright is
contained. Sections 44 and 45 are relevant, which are extracted below:

"44. Register of Copyrights - There shall be kept at the Copyright Office a
register in the prescribed form to be called the Register of Copyrights in
which may be entered the names or titles of works and the names and addresses
of authors, publishers and owners of copyright and such other particulars as
may be prescribed.

45\. Entries in Register of Copyrights --(1) The author or publisher of, or
the owner of or other person interested in the copyright in, any work may make
an application in the prescribed form accompanied by the prescribed fee to the
Registrar of Copyrights for entering particulars of the work in the Register
of Copyrights.

Provided that in respect of an artistic work which is used or is capable of
being used in relation to any goods, the application shall include a statement
to that effect and shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Registrar of
Trade Marks referred to in Section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act,
1958 (43 of 1958), to the effect that no trade mark identical with or
deceptively similar to such artistic work has been registered under that Act
in the name of, or that no application has been made under that Act for such
registration by, any person other than the applicant.

(2) On receipt of an application in respect of any work under Sub-section (1),
the Registrar of Copyright may, after holding such inquiry as he may deem fit,
enter the particulars of the work in the register of Copyrights."

19\. From a reading of the above provisions, it is to be noted that the author
interested in the copyright in any work shall make an application to the
appropriate authority for entering the particulars of the works in the
Register of the copyrights. However, in respect of an artistic work which is
used or is capable of being used in relation to any goods, the application
shall include a statement to that effect and shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the Registrar of Trademarks referred to in Section 4 of Trade
and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 to the effect that no trademark identical with
or deceptively similar to such artistic work has been registered under that
Act. Under Section 50 Copyright Act, rectification of registration by
Copyright Board reads thus:

"50. Rectification of Register by Copyright Board:- The Copyright Board, on
application of the Registrar of Copyrights or of any person aggrieved, shall
order the rectification of the Register of Copyrights by-

(a) the making of any entry wrongly omitted to be made in the register, or

(b) the expunging of any entry wrongly made in, or remaining on, the register,
or

(c) the correction of any error or defect in the register."

From the above said provision, it is clear that if any person is aggrieved by
the entries in the copyright register, he is entitled to make an application
to the Copyright Board, who will order the rectification of copyrights either
by expunging any entry made wrongly or correction of any mistake or defect
etc.

20\. Therefore, the issue that arises for consideration is when both the
plaintiff and the Defendants, who are the holders of copyright can one of them
allege infringement of the copyright over the other?

21\. Infringement of copyright is contained in Chapter-II under Section 51,
which is extracted below:

"Section 51. When copyright infringed- Copyright in a work shall be deemed to
be infringed-

(a) when any person, without a licence granted by the owner of the copyright
or the Registrar of Copyrights under this Act or in contravention of the
conditions of a licence so granted or of any condition imposed by a competent
authority under this Act-

(i) does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred
upon the owner of the copyright, or

(ii) xxx"

Therefore, a copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed, when any
person without a licence granted by the owner of the copyright or the
Registrar of the Copyrights under the Act or in contravention of the
conditions of the license does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by
the Act conferred upon the owner of the copyright, it amounts to infringement.
But, admittedly, both the persons are holding registered copyright in an
artistic work. In such a situation, can it be said that they can allege
infringement of copyright over the other. Both of them are claiming the
copyright of artistic work of Eenadu words and in such a situation, the
question is whether the aggrieved party should apply for rectification of the
registered copyright by the Copyright Board under Section 50 or can he allege
infringement of copyright before the Civil Court. Under Section 55, Civil
remedy is provided for infringement of copyright and under Section 62
jurisdiction of civil Court is contained. Sections 55 and 62 are reproduced
below:

"Section 55: Civil remedies for infringement of copyright- (1) Where copyright
in any work has been infringed, the owner of the copyright shall, except as
otherwise provided by this Act, be entitled to all such remedies by way of
injunction, damages, accounts and otherwise as are or may be, conferred by law
for the infringement of a right.

Provided that if the defendant proves that at the date of the infringement he
was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing that copyright
subsisted in the work, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to any remedy other
than an injunction in respect of the infringement and a decree for the whole
or part of the profits made by the defendant by the sale of the infringing
copies as the Court may in the circumstances deem reasonable.

(2) Where, in the case of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a
name purporting to be that of the author or the publisher, as the case may be,
appears on copies of the work as published, or, in the case of an artistic
work, appeared on the work when it was made, the person whose name so appears
or appeared shall in any proceeding in respect of infringement of copyright in
such work, be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to be the author or the
publisher of the work, as the case may be.

(3) The costs of all parties in any proceedings in respect of the infringement
of copyright shall be in the discretion of the Court."

Section 62: Jurisdiction of Court over matters arising under this Chapter -(1)
Every suit or other civil proceeding arising under this Chapter in respect of
the infringement of copyright in any work or the infringement of any other
rights conferred by this Act shall be instituted in the District Court having
jurisdiction.

(2) for the purpose of Sub-section (1), a "District Court having jurisdiction"
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908), or any other law for the time being in force, include a District
Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time of the
institution of the suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit
or other proceeding or, where there are more than one such persons, any of
them actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain."

22\. Admittedly, plaintiff and defendant are the registered owners of the
respective artistic works in their own sphere; and the power of rectification
is vested with the Copyright Board.

23\. Under Section 72 of Copyright Act, an appeal lies by the aggrieved party
lies against the Registrar of Copyrights to the Copyright Board and under Sub-
section (2), a further appeal lies to the High Court against any order made by
the Copyright Board other than an order under appeal. Therefore, if any person
is aggrieved by an order passed under Section 50, the appeal lies under Sub-
section (2) of Section 72, under Section 17 of the Copyright Act the author of
the work is the first owner and if any person does anything without the
permission of the owner it amounts to infringement of copyright under Section
51 of the Act. But the crucial question is as to who is the original author of
the work. Both the plaintiff and defendant are claiming ownership in respect
of their respective artistic work - one is claiming the word Eenadu in Telugu
script and another (defendant) is claiming the artistic work on entire carton.
Therefore, under these circumstances when one registered copyright holder
alleges infringement of copyright by the other registered owner, then the
remedy available for them is to go under Section 50 of the Copyright Act for
rectification of entry by means of expunging and they cannot lay any claim
before the Civil Court. Hence, I am of the opinion, the plaintiff cannot
successfully raise the plea of infringement of copyright before Civil Court
and he has to initiate proceedings under Section 50 of the Copyright Act.

24\. Even assuming that a Civil suit would lie for infringement of copyright,
let us consider whether the plaintiff has been able to establish the
infringement of copyright. I have already narrated the artistic work of both
plaintiff and defendant. While it is the case of the plaintiff that the
copyright being used by the defendant is deceptively similar in get up, layout
and arrangement of words 'Eenadu' in Telugu script. Even though there is no
similarity in the goods handled by both parties, yet, the words used by the
defendant so resemble as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion in the
minds of public and the defendant is passing off his goods (Agarbathis) by
creating an impression as if they are goods of plaintiff and thus encashing
the goodwill and reputation of the plaintiff copyright and trademark. Since
this issue is intricately connected with issue relating to passing off action,
yet let us consider whether the plaintiff has been able to establish
infringement of copyright by the defendant. The learned Counsel for the
parties relied on enormous case law both English and Indian decisions. Let us
consider them as far as they are applicable to the facts of the case.

25\. The learned Counsel for the plaintiff would however contend that the
defendant had infringed the copyright of the plaintiff inasmuch as he used the
word Eenadu which is an artistic work prepared by the plaintiff. He submits
that it is not necessary that the defendant should reproduce the entire
copyright, but if he does substantially the infringement is established. He
relies on The Daily Calendar Supplying Bureau, Sivakasi v. United Concern AIR
1967 Mad. 381. It is true the Division Bench held that it is not necessary
that the defendant should reproduce the entire artistic work, but what is
essential is whether a substantial part of picture was reproduced, What is
substantial part depends on the opinion formed after examination of entire
picture.

26\. In Kaviraj Pandi Durga Dutta Sharma v. Navaratna Pharmaceutical
Laboratories , the Supreme Court observed thus:

"An action for passing off is a Common Law remedy being in substance an action
for deceipt, that is, a passing off by a person of his own goods as those of
another. But that is not gist of an action for infringement. The action for
infringement is a statutory remedy conferred on the registered proprietor of a
registered trademark for the vindication of 'the exclusive right to the use of
the trademark in relation to those goods'. The use by the defendant of the
trademark of the plaintiff is not essential in an action for passing off, but
is the sine qua non in the case of an action for infringement. No doubt, where
the evidence in respect of passing off consists merely of the colourable use
of a registered trademark, the essential features of both the actions might
coincide in the sense that what would be a colourable limitation of a
trademark in a passing off action would also be such in an action for
infringement of the same trademark. But, there the correspondence between the
two cases. In an action for infringement, the plaintiff must, no doubt, make
out that the use of the defendant's mark is likely to deceive, but where the
similarity between the plaintiff's and the defendant's mark is so close either
visually, phonetically or otherwise and the Court reaches the conclusion that
there is an imitation, no further evidence is required to establish that the
plaintiff's rights are violated. Expressed in another way, if the essential
features of the trademark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the defendant,
the fact that the get up, packing and other writing or marks on the goods or
on the packets in which he offers his goods for sale show marked differences,
or indicate clearly a trade origin different from that of the registered
proprietor of the mark would be immaterial; whereas in the case of passing
off, the defendant may, escape liability if he can show that the added matter
is sufficient to distinguish his goods from those of the plaintiff.

When once the use by the defendant of the mark which is claimed to infringe
the plaintiff's mark is shown to be "in the course of trade", the question
whether there has been an infringement is to be decided by comparison of the
marks. Where the two marks are identical no further questions arise; for then
the infringement is made out. When the two marks are not identical, the
plaintiff would have to establish that the mark used by the defendant so
nearly resembles the plaintiff's registered trademark as is likely to deceive
or cause confusion and in relation to goods in respect of which it is
registered. Where the question arises in an action for infringement, the onus
would be on the plaintiff to establish that the trademark used by the
defendant in the course of trade in the goods in respect of which his mark is
registered, is deceptively similar. This has necessarily to be ascertained by
a comparison of the two marks -the degree of resemblance which is necessary to
exist to cause deception not being capable of definition by laying down
objective standards. The persons who would be deceived are, of course, the
purchasers of the goods and it is the likelihood of their being deceived that
is the subject of consideration. The resemblance may be phonetic, visual or in
the basic idea represented by the plaintiff's mark. The purpose of the
comparison is for determining whether the essential features of the
plaintiff's trademark are to be found in that used by the defendant. The
identification of the essential features of the mark is in essence a question
of fact and depends on the judgment of the Court based on the evidence led
before it as regards the usage of the trade. It should, however, be borne in
mind that the object of the enquiry in ultimate analysis is whether the mark
used by the Defendant as a whole is deceptively similar to that of the
registered mark of the plaintiff."

27\. In Ruston Andhornby Ltd. v. Zamindara Engineering Company , the Supreme
Court held as follows:

"The action for infringement is a statutory right. It is dependent upon the
validity of the registration and subject to other restrictions laid down in
Sections 30, 34 and 35 of the Act. On the other hand, the gist of a passing
off action is that A is not entitled to represent his goods as the goods of B
but it is not necessary for B to prove that A did this knowingly or with any
intent to deceive. It is enough that the get-up of B's goods has become
distinctive of them and there is a probability of confusion between them and
the goods of A. No case of actual deception nor any actual damage need be
proved. At common law the action was not maintainable unless there had been
fraud on A's part. In equity, however, Lord Cottenham L.C. in Millington v.
Fox (1838) 3 My and Copyright 338 held that it was immaterial whether the
defendant had been fraudulent or not in using the plaintiff's trademark and
granted an injunction accordingly. The common law Courts, however, adhered to
their view that fraud was necessary until the Judicature Acts, by fusing law
and equity gave the equitable rule the victory over the common law rule.

28\. Referring to the above decisions, the Supreme Court observed in S.M.
Dyechem Limited v. Cadbury (India) Limited AIR 2000 SC 2114, as follows:

"24. We shall now refer to the broad principles applicable to infringement
actions and in particular to devices, labels and composite marks.

Essential features if copied:

25\. It is well settled that the plaintiff must prove that essential features
of his registered mark have been copied. The onus to prove 'deception' is on
the part of the plaintiff who alleges infringement. A mark is said to be
infringed by another trader if, even without using the whole of it, the latter
uses one or more of its "essential features". The identification of an
essential feature depends partly on the Courts own judgment and partly on the
burden of the evidence that is placed before it. Ascertainment of an essential
feature is not to be by ocular test alone, it is impossible to exclude
consideration of the sound of words forming part of the whole of the mark.
(Kerly, Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names. 11th Entitled. 1983 Para 14.21).

26\. It is no answer to a charge of infringement - As contrasted with a
passing off action - that the defendant's mark, whilst including the
plaintiff's mark, includes other matters too. Still less is it an answer that
by something outside that actual mark the defendant has distinguished his
goods from those of the plaintiff by adding his own name (Kerly para 14.22).
But this principle is not absolute. It is also accepted that addition of his
own name by Defendant is an element to be considered and may turn the scales
in favour of the defendant. In same para 14.22, Kerly says:

"But the use of the defendant's name as part of the mark complained of is an
element to be considered and in some cases it has turned the scale in his
favour" (Jewsbury and Brown v. Andrew and Atkinson, (1911) 28 PRC 293)."

Jewsbury case was a case relating to infringement. (Of course, in Para 14.25
Kerly also refers to cases where addition of defendant's name has not turned
the scales).

27\. So far as resemblance in words is concerned, Justice Parker in Pianotist
Co's Applications (Pianola): (1906) 23 PRC 774 (at 777) has stated as follows:

"You must take the two words. You must judge of them, both by their look and
by their sound. You must consider the goods to which they are to be applied.
You must consider the nature and kind of customer who would be likely to buy
the goods. In fact, you must consider all the surrounding circumstances and
you must further consider what is likely to happen if each of these trademarks
is used in a normal way as a trademark for the goods of the respective owners
of the marks. If considering all those circumstances, you come to the
conclusion that there will be confusion-that is to say, not necessarily that
one man will be injured and the other will gain illicit benefit, but there
will be confusion in the mind of the public which will lead to confusion in
the goods-then you may refuse registration, or rather you must refuse
registration in that case."

This dictum has been quoted with approval by this Court in Amritdhara Pharmacy
v. Satya Deo Gupta and Roche v. Geoffrey Manners and Co. Pvt. Ltd. .

Devices and Composite Marks:

28\. But the considerations, relating to words, however, differ appreciably
when device marks are to be compared or when a device mark is to be compared
with a word mark. (Kerly Para 17.07). After referring to the factors mentioned
by Parker, J. in the above case, it is stated in Halsbury's Laws of England
(Vol. 38, 3rd Entitled, para 986) as follows:

"These considerations differ to some extent when device marks are being
compared or when a device mark is compared with a word mark."

Dissimilarity in essential features in devices and composite marks more
important than some similarity:

29\. It has been stressed for the appellant that since the word PICNIC is used
by defendant while plaintiff is using its misspelling PIKNIK, this is an
essential feature which is similar phonetically or visually and there is
therefore, infringement. It is argued that presence of even one essential
feature in defendant mark is sufficient. In our opinion, in the case of
devices and composite marks, the above principle has not been strictly
applied. The English Courts have laid emphasis more on dissimilarities in
essential feature rather than on similarity. The "whole thing" principle is
based on first impression as seen by the Court. we shall now refer to these
principles laid down in the English cases.

30\. When the question arises whether a mark applied forbears such resemblance
to another mark as to be likely to deceive, it should be determined by
considering what is the leading character of each. The one might contain many,
even most, of the same elements as the other, and yet the leading, or it may
be the only, impression left on the mind might be very different. On the other
hand, a critical comparison of the two marks might disclose numerous points of
difference, and yet the idea which would remain with any person seeing them
apart at different times might be the same. Thus, it is clear that a mark is
infringed if the essential features, or essential particulars of it, are
copied. In cases of device marks, especially, it is helpful before comparing
the marks, to consider what are the essentials of the plaintiffs device.
(Kerely Para 17.08). The trademark is the whole thing-the whole picture on
each has to be considered. There may be differences in the parts of each mark,
but it is important to consider the mode in which the parts are put together
and to judge whether the dissimilarity of the part or parts is enough to make
the whole dissimilar. It has been said that if the only resemblances between
two marks are in parts which are common, so that the owner of the one has
taken nothing which is peculiar to the other, then there is at all events no
infringement, at any rate unless the plaintiff had a distinctive arrangement
of the common elements. But, this approach is hardly suited to a comparison
word marks; and even in relation to label marks or other features of get-up,
it would be more appropriate to consider the case as a whole, with due regard
to the background provided by any other marks shown to be in use (Kerly Para
17.17). Therefore, the question is whether the defendant has, so far as the
common feature is concerned - copied any distinctive arrangement of the common
elements? Or has copied any unusual feature of the common element (Crispin's
Appln., (1917) 34 RPC 249) (See Kerly Para 17, 19, fn.77). The marks, names or
get-up concerned must always be considered as the whole thing, as the true
test is whether the totality of the impression given both orally and visually
is such that it is likely to cause mistake, deception or confusion (Halsbury
Vol. 38, 3rd Entitled Para 987)."

29\. While distinguishing, the distinctive features of passing off and
infringement, the Supreme Court observed thus:

"47. Here the point is in relation to relative strength of the parties on the
question of passing off. As discussed under Point 5, the proof of resemblance
or similarity in cases of passing off and infringement are different. In a
passing off action additions, get-up or trade-dress might be relevant to
enable the defendant to escape. In infringement cases, such facts do not
assume relevance. (See: Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna Pharmaceutical
Laboratories Ltd. ; Ruston and Hornsby Ltd. v. Zamindara Engineering Co. and
Wander Ltd. v. Antox India Pvt. Ltd. 1990 Suppl. SCC 727).

48\. It is possible that, on the same facts, a suit for passing off may fall
but a suit or infringement may succeed because the additions, the get up and
trade dress may enable a defendant to escape in a passing off action. A
somewhat similar but interesting situation arose in a dispute between two
companies. In N.S. Thread Co. v. James Chadwick and Bros. AIR 1948 Mad. 481,
the passing off action failed. But, thereafter James Chadwick Co. succeeded in
an appeal arising out of the registration proceedings and the said judgment
was confirmed by this Court in N.S. Thread Co. Ltd. v. James Chadwick and
Bors. Ltd. . It was held that the judgment in the passing off case could not
be relied upon by the opposite side in latter registration proceedings.

49\. In the same tone, Halsbury (Trade Marks, 4th Entitled. 1984 Vol. 48 Para
187) says that in a passing off action the "degree of similarity of the name,
mark or other features concerned is important but not necessarily decisive, so
that an action for infringement of a registered trademark may succeed on the
same facts where a passing off action fails or vice versa." As to vice versa,
Kerly says (Para 16.12), an infringement action may fall where plaintiff
cannot prove registration or that its registration extends to the goods or to
all the goods in question or because the registration is invalid and yet the
plaintiff may show that by imitating the mark or otherwise, the defendant has
done what is calculated to passing off his goods as those of plaintiff.

50\. In Scheweppes Ltd. v. Gibbens (1905) 22 RPC 601 (HL), Lord Halsbury said,
while dealing with a passing off action that "the whole question in these
cases is whether thing taken in its entirety, looking at the whole thing-is
such that in the ordinary course of things a person with reasonable
comprehension and with proper insight would be deceived."

Defendant's name on his goods is an indication of there being no case of
passing off.

51\. In the present case, the defendant's goods contain the words 'Cadbury' on
their wrappers. As per the principle laid down in Fisons Ltd. v. E.J. Godwin
(1917) RPC 653, the occurrence of the name 'Cadbury' on the defendant's
wrapper is a factor to be considered while deciding the question of passing
off. Similarly in King and Co. Ltd. v. Gillard and Co. Ltd. (1905) 22 RPC 327
and Cadbury Schweppes Pty. Ltd. v. The Publication Squash Ltd. (1981) RPC 429,
it was held that the presence of defendant's name on his goods was an
indication that there was no passing off, even of the trade dress was similar.

52\. The fact that the defendant's wrapper contains the word 'Cadbury' above
the words PICNIC as therefore, a factor which is to be taken into account.

Buyer's ignorance and chances of being deceived:

53\. As to scope of a buyer being deceived in a passing off action, the
following principles have to be borne in mind. Lord Romer, LJ has said in
Payton and Co. v. Snelling Lampard and Co. (1900) 17 RPC 48 that it is a
misconception to refer to the confusion that can be created upon an ignorant
customer. The kind of customer that the Courts ought to think of in these
cases is the customer who knows the distinguishing characteristics of the
plaintiff's goods, those characteristics which distinguish his goods from
other goods in the market so far as relates to general characteristics. If he
does not know that, he is not a customer whose views can properly be regarded
by the Court. (See the cases quoted in N.S. Thread and Co. v. Chadwick and
Bros. AIR 1948 Madras 481 which was a passing off action). In Scheweppes'
case, Lord Halsbury said, if a person is so careless that he does not look and
does not treat the label fairly but takes the bottle without sufficient
consideration and without reading what is written very plainly indeed up the
face of the label, you cannot say he is deceived.

54\. In our view, the trial Court in the present case went wrong in principle
in holding that there was scope for a purchaser being misled. The conclusion
was arrived at without noticing the above principles."

30\. Thus infringement action is available where there is violation of
specific property right acquired under and recognised by the statute. In a
passing off action, however, the plaintiff's right is independent of such a
statutory right to a trademark and is against the conduct of the Defendant
which leads to or is intended or calculated to lead to deception. Passing off
is said to be species of unfair trade competition to obtain an economic
benefit of the reputation which another has established for himself in a
particular trade or business. The action is regarded as action for deceit. The
tort of passing off involves a misrepresentation made by a trade to his
prospective customers calculated to injure, as a reasonably forceable
consequences, the business or good will of another which actually or probably,
causes damages to the business of the goods of the other trader.

31\. Applying the aforesaid principle, it has to be seen whether there was
infringement of copyright by the defendant or whether there was substantial
reproduction of the copyright of the plaintiff. The trial Court took into
consideration that plaintiff has been using the word from 1974 though it was
registered in 1999 and held that the plaintiff being a prior user, it is
entitled to claim exclusive ownership even though the registration of
copyright by defendant is earlier in point. That is not the question to be
decided in this regard. Whether there was reproduction of plaintiff's
copyright is the prime point and whether there was reproduction of essential
features. The Supreme Court in S.M. Dyechem's case (4th cited supra), was
considering the provision of Trademark Act, but yet the same principles will
apply when the aspect of infringement of trademark or copyright is dealt with.
The Supreme Court observed that in determining the essential features,
dissimilarities take priority over similarities. In the instant case,
according to the plaintiff, essential feature of the copyright is the artistic
work of word Eenadu in Telugu script. But the defendant contention is that
there are many dissimilarities, essential features, more especially in a case
of unrelated goods. It is in evidence that as per Ex.A-43, the word Eenadu was
registered as copyright whereas the entire carton with inscription Ashikavari
Eenadu Agarbathis with colour scheme was registered in 1997. An over all
comparison of the artistic work on the carton and the sole word Eenadu one
would come to inescapable conclusion that dissimilarities are in abundance.
The carton on its one side the words Ashikavari Eenadu Agarbathis was printed
in artistic design, on the reverse side it is printed in English language as
"Ashika's Eenadu incense sticks". The most important and crucial document for
the purpose of comparison is the artistic work of word Eenadu in telugu
script. In Ex.A-43, the work as registered in 1999 vide registration No.
A-56447/99, dated 9-7-1999. In the remarks column it is stated "The copy of
the work is annexed." But, this vital document has not been filed. This
document is the only document which builds the foundation for the entire case
of infringement of copyright. Non-filing of this document is fatal to the case
of plaintiff. The Onus is on the plaintiff to establish and exhibit the work
that was registered. When such document is not brought into evidence, it must
be held that the plaintiff failed to discharge its burden. The learned trial
Court failed to consider this aspect and proceeded as if there was a
registered artistic work under the Copyright Act. The words "two in one" and
logo are in yellow colour with red stripes. On the side flaps the word Eenadu
was printed in three languages viz., Tamil, Hindi and Malayalam. In the
evidence also it was accepted that the vertical lines in the registered
copyright of plaintiff Eenadu Telugu script are not there on the carton
containing the word Eenadu. Thus, I find that the plaintiff has not been able
to establish that the defendant has infringed the copyright of the plaintiff.
The finding of the lower Court accordingly set aside.

Passing of Action:

32\. The most crucial and important issue that arises for consideration is
whether the plaintiff had established passing off goods by the defendant as
that of plaintiff's. Case law on this issue is enormous. In this regard, it is
to be noted that in most of the cases issues related to passing off goods of
identical nature namely related goods and in most of the cases the matters
came up on appeal against the interlocutory orders either granting temporary
injunction under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 or refusing the same. Passing off
action is sought to be established by various means viz., deceptive
similarity, prior user of mark, distinctive and secondary meaning, household
name for the product, generic meaning acquiring reputation and goodwill in the
market etc. Equally the defendant has many defences such as honest bona fide
user, acquiescence, general descriptive word, bar under Specific Relief Act,
unrelated goods, absence of similarities, visual, phonetic and other
circumstances etc. Let us consider the cases on the above sub-heads cited by
both the Counsel.

Deceptive Similarity/Distinctive goods

33\. The Madras High Court in Shanmugavel v. Associated Publishers (Madras)
Limited 1997 I PLR 82, held thus:

"24. It is well settled that deceptive similarly is not to be decided by
keeping the two marks side by side and comparing them but to find out whether
ordinary purchasers with a normally imperfect recollection or average memory
would mistake the goods of the defendant for those of the plaintiff. But
newspapers are not like articles such as tea, soap etc., or any other article
bought by the public who take one particular word of a distinctive name and
are caught by the similarity in the type, size, or colour of the packages. As
pointed out in Borthwick v. The Evesing Post, 37 Ch.D. 443 by Cotton L.J. the
newspapers will be the same and not merely take a hasty look at it. They will
be in position to form an opinion upon the politics contained in the
newspapers. They are persons of more intelligence and are not likely to be
mislead by the colour or intimation of name as purchasers of house hold
article etc.

25\. In D.V. Thomson & Co. Limited v. Kent Messenger Limited and Anr., 1975
R.P.C. 191, the question was whether the proprietor of a newspaper 'The Sunday
post" could get a quia timet interlocutory injunction restraining the
publication of a newspaper called "The South East Sunday Post". Megarry, J.
held that the word 'post' was only descriptive and popular and not fancy or
distinctive. The same can be said of the word 'Mail' in the trademark of the
plaintiff.

26\. In Newsweek Inc. v. British Broadcasting Corporation, 1979 R.P.C. 441,
the plaintiffs were publishers of the weekly news magazine "Newsweek". The
defendants proposed transmitting four times a week a programme entitled
'Newsweek'. The Court held that the word 'newsweek' was an ordinary
descriptive word and the average television viewer in the United Kingdom would
be unlikely to associate the television programme with anything but the B.B.C.
Walton, J. said:

"It is not the sort of case where you have well known invented words or words
which have become household names such as Kodak; for example, Dunlop or
something of that nature. It is perfectly true that it is an invented word,
but is comes from two ordinary English words signifying precisely and exactly
news of the week. Therefore, it seems to me that if we have to take the
ordinary viewers as our guide, and I think we must take the ordinary man as
our guide looking at the programme he will not be under any misapprehension at
all as to where it comes from.

"This word 'Newsweek' is very largely a descriptive word. It is 'News of the
week', shortened for commercial and publicity purposes to 'Newsweek'. I do not
think we should give any publication virtually a monopoly in that largely
descriptive word. It would stretch all over the English speaking countries. We
certainly should not do it when the great majority of the ordinary folk on
England who watch television would not have the slightest idea or slightest
knowledge of the American Periodical 'Newsweek'."

34\. In Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satyadeo Gupta the Supreme Court held thus:

"The words used in the sections and relevant for our purpose are "likely to
deceive or cause confusion". The Act does not. lay down any criteria for
determining what is likely to deceive or cause confusion. Therefore, every
case must depend on its own particular facts, and the value of authorities
lies not so much in the actual decision as in the tests applied for
determining what is likely to deceive or cause confusion. On an application to
register, the Registrar or an opponent may object that the trademark is not
registerable by reason of Clause (a) of Section 8, or Sub-section (1) of
Section 10, as in this case. In such a case, the onus is on the applicant to
satisfy the Registrar that the trademark applied for is not likely to deceive
or cause confusion. In cases in which the Tribunal considers that there is
doubt as to whether deception is likely, the application should be refused. A
trademark is likely to deceive or cause confusion by its resemblance to
another already on the Register if it is likely to do so in the course of its
legitimate use in the market where the two marks are assumed to be in use by
traders in that market. In considering the matter, all the circumstances of
the case must be considered."

The Supreme Court further held:

"For deceptive resemblance two important questions are: (1) who are the
persons whom the resemblance must be likely to deceive or confuse, and (2)
what rules of comparison are to be adopted in judging whether such resemblance
exists. As to confusion, it is perhaps an appropriate description of the state
of mind of a customer who, on seeing a mark thinks that it differs from the
mark on goods, which he has previously bought, but is doubtful whether that
impression is not due to imperfect recollection."

"The question has to be approached from the point of view of a man of average
intelligence and imperfect recollection. To such a man the overall structural
and phonetic similarity of the two names 'Amritdhara' and 'Lakshmandhara' is,
in our opinion, likely to deceive or cause confusion. We must consider the
overall similarity of the two composite words 'Amritdhara' and
'Lakshmandhara'."

"What degree of resemblance is necessary to deceive or cause confusion must in
the nature of things be incapable of definition a priori."

35\. In Parle Products Limited v. Bakemans Industries Limited IPLR 1999 Jan.
81, the Madras High Court observed at Para 18 as follows:

"In the instant case, neither the applicant nor the respondent is using the
mark 'GLUCO' on a stand alone basis to apply the 'same mark' yardstick. The
applicant is using the mark with a prefix - Parle-G Gluco -and the respondent
with a suffix -'Glucogold'. Therefore, the yardstick for similar mark has to
be applied. Both the products are packed with wrappers. Therefore, the colour,
getup and lettering ought to be compared to find out similarities or
dissimilarities."

36\. In Sony Corporation v. Elite Optical Company 1987 IPLR 93, it was held
thus:

"(1) that Sony was not an invented word but a common surname interchangeable
with Soni as could be seen from entries in the telephone directory and that it
was a qualified for registration under Section 9 of the Act as proved by the
evidence of acquired distinctive produced by the applicant;

(2) that although the rival marks were identical, the rival goods, albeit
falling in the same class, were totally different and hence the objection
under Section 12 could not be sustained;

(3) that although the opponents proved extensive use of the mark Sony for
electronic goods, in view of the totally different nature of the applicant's
goods and in view of absence of instances of actual confusion between the
rival goods, the objection under Section 11 could not be sustained.

(4) that no evidence was produced by the opponents to establish that the
applicant had copied their mark. Hence, it was not possible to conclude that
the applicant could not claim to be the proprietor of the mark."

37\. In Associated Electronic and Electrical Industries v. Sharp Tools Limited
AIR 1991 Kar. 406, an appeal was filed for cancellation of copyright entry
under Section 50 of the Copyright Act.

38\. In R.G. Anand v. Delux Films the Supreme Court laid down the following
proposition:

"(1) There can be copyright in an idea subject matter, themes, plots or
historical or legendary facts, and violation of the copyright in such cases is
confined to the form, manner and arrangement and expression of the idea by the
author of the copyright work.

(2) Where the same idea is being developed in a different manner, it is
manifest that the source being common, similarities are bound to occur. In
such a case the Courts should determine whether or not the similarities are on
fundamental or substantial aspects of the mode of expression adopted in the
copyrighted work. If the defendant's work is nothing but a literal imitation
of the copyrighted work with some variations here and there it would amount to
violation of the copyright. In other words, in order to be actionable the copy
must substantial and material one which at once leads to the conclusion that
the defendant is guilty of an act of piracy.

(3) One of the surest and the safest test to determine whether or not there
has been violation of copyright is to see if the reader, spectator or the
viewer after having read or seen both the works is clearly of the opinion and
gets and unmistakable impression that the subsequent work appears to be a copy
of the original.

(4) Whether the theme is the same but is presented and treated differently so
that the subsequent work becomes a completely new work, no question of
violation of copyright arises.

(5) Where, however, apart from the similarities appearing in the two works
there are also material and broad dissimilarities which negative the intention
to occupy the original and the coincidences appearing in the two works are
clearly incidental no infringement of the copyright comes into existence.

(6) As a violation of copyright amounts to an act of piracy it must be proved
by clear and cogent evidence after applying the various tests laid down by the
case law discussed above."

39\. Similarly in the case of Kenrick & Co. v. Lawrence & Co. (1993)25 QBD 99,
it was however, held that there was no copyright in ideas, schemes or systems.
In that connection, it has observed as follows:

"It must always be remembered that ideas, however original are not protected
under the Copyright Act. Consequently where a very simple diagram embodies an
original idea, it is the diagram and not the idea which is protected. Thus a
plaintiff conceived the idea of printing and publishing cards bearing a
representation of a hand holdings a pencil in the act of completing a cross
within the square. With a view to such cards being used at election by
illiterate voters and procured an artist to make under his direction a drawing
of the representation above described. Subsequently, the defendant published
similar cards with a hand holding pencil, in the act of completing a cross in
a particular square, or a voting paper, but the hand in the defendant's card
was in a slightly different position. Though the idea was clearly taken from
the plaintiff's card it was held that the defendant's had not infringed the
plaintiff's copyright. There was no copyright in the idea. The defendant's
work was not an exact reproduction of the plaintiff's and the plaintiff was
not entitled to prevent any one from producing such a simple design as a hand
in a square in any form. The case could probably have been put on the ground
that there was no evidence of copying the actual drawing although the idea of
making and using such drawing was no doubt copied."

40\. It was observed by Lord Halsbury in Scheweppes Ld. v. Gibbens:

"The whole question in these cases is whether the thing-taken in its entirety,
looking at the whole thing - is such that in the ordinary course of things a
person with reasonable apprehension and with proper eyesight would be
deceived."

41\. In Cadila Laboratories (P) Ltd. v. Kamath Atul and Co. the learned Judge
observed at para 14 as follows:

"This aspect of the matter is again considered by the Delhi High Court
recently in Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd. v. Dua Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. . In
the said case a Drugs making Company "A" had registered trademark "CALMPOSE"
having handsome turnover. Subsequently, another drug making company "B"
floated its similar product under the trademark "CALMPROSE", only by inserting
the letter 'R' and converting "CALMPOSE" into "CALMPROSE". The two trademarks
appeared phonetically and visually similar. The dimension of the strip of B
company was practically the same as the one made by the A company the type of
packing was identical, the colour scheme was similar and even the manner of
writing was not very different. It is, therefore, held that it was a clear
case of an attempt by B company to pass off its product as that of "A"
company. I have already noticed that in the instant case also the cartons of
the two skin ointments are practically the same in width and length of the
defendant's carton is about 1/2" shorter than the plaintiff's carton and both
of them are herbal skin ointments and the only difference in their trademarks
is that in the plaintiff's product the letter 13' is used while in the
defendant's product manufactured and marketed in or about 1988 July, the
letter 'E' is substituted in place of 'U'. It was not disputed at the time of
argument that no drug licence is required for keeping and selling any of the
two skin ointments in question and no prescription of a Doctor is necessary
for purchasing the same. Therefore, the possibility of a person in need of a
skin ointment going to a drug shop or even to a pawn shop and asking for
"HURBINOL" ointment and the concerned druggist or pawn shop keeper passing off
the defendant's product "HERBINOL" and the said person going away with
"HERBINOL" as the skin ointment he wanted cannot be ruled cut. It is observed
in the abovementioned decision after examining the strips containing the
medicines manufactured by the parties that the dimension of the strip of
defendants is practically the same as that of the plaintiff, that the type of
packing is identical, that the colour scheme is similar and even the manner of
writing is not very different and, therefore, it was a clear case of an
attempt by the defendants to passing off its product as that of the plaintiff.
Consequently, interim injunction issued in favour of the plaintiff in that
case is made absolute pending disposal of the suit."

42\. The Division Bench of this Court in Teju Singh v. Shanta Devi , aptly
enunciated the principle which applies to the case of an action for passing
off the goods. In Para 4, the Bench held thus:

"When the plaintiff brought the suit it was only a common law action for
"passing off" the plaintiff's business name. The scope of an action for
passing off goods is now too well settled to require elaborate citation of
authorities. It is a remedy against a false representation tending to deceive
customers into believing that the goods which the defendant is selling are
really the plaintiff's. The false representation may be by statements or by
conduct, i.e., by adopting the distinctive mark, name, number, design, get-up
or appearance of another's goods. The plaintiff may prove either an intent to
deceive or an actual damage and it is enough if he shows that the conduct of
the defendant was calculated or likely to deceive or mislead public. On proof
of these facts the plaintiff would be entitled to an injunction or damages.
The onus is on the plaintiff to show that his goods acquired a reputation
among the public by some distinctive mark, name, etc. The same principles
which are applied in the case of an action for "passing off" the goods are
applied where the name of a person's business is imitated and passed off by
another person as his own. It has now been uniformally laid down as settled
rule that either in the case of goods or business the plaintiff has to show
that his mark has become so distinctive that the public regard the same as
belonging to a particular source. The plaintiff has to further prove that the
offending mark or name is likely or calculated to deceive and cause confusion
among the public thereby injuring the plaintiff's business. It has also been
held that where a trader adopts a trading name including mere descriptive
words of common use of the Court will not readily assume that the use of the
said word or name by another is likely to cause confusion. In such cases it is
incumbent upon the plaintiff to show that the name has acquired a secondary
meaning in connection with the goods or business so that the use of this name
by another is likely to deceive the public."

43\. The Division Bench also refers to certain English decisions in paras 5
and 6, which are extracted below:

"5. We will now refer to a few decisions to illustrate the above principles.
In frang Reddaway and Frank Reddaway and Co. Ltd., 1896 AC 199 the plaintiff
was manufacturing and selling what is known as "Camel Hair Belting". The
defendant, also began to sell belting made of Camel's hair in the name of
"Camel Hair Belting". It was held that though the name was descriptive of the
nature of the goods, it had come to be associated with the plaintiff's
business and that the defendant should adopt some other device to distinguish
his goods. In Cellular Clothing Company Ltd. v. Maxton and Murray (1899) A.C.
326, the plaintiff marked his goods as "Cellular Cloth" denoting description
of the fabric out of which the cloth is made. The defendant also used the same
word. It was held that the word "Cellular" was an ordinary English word which
appropriately and conveniently described the cloth of which the goods sold
were manufactured and that no relief can be acquired a secondary or a special
meaning so as to denote that the goods only belong to the f. It was held in
the course of the judgment that no one can acquire an exclusive right to the
use of a word or term which is in ordinary use descriptive only unless it is
further proved that such descriptive word acquired a distinctive and secondary
meaning during course of time. In British Vacuum Cleaner Co. Ltd. v. New
Vacuum Clearner Co. Ltd. (1907) 2 Ch. 312, there were two rival companies
doing business in the name of "British Vacuum Cleaner Co. Ltd." On the one
hand and New Vacuum Cleaner Co. Ltd. on the other. It was held that the words
"Vacuum Cleaner" are only descriptive words and that unless there is proof of
the said words having acquired a secondary or distinctive meaning no action
lies to stop another person from using the same description. But, it was
observed that the use of a fancy word stands on a different footing, as such
word does not relate to the article but the person who makes the article.
Similarly, in Office Cleaning Services Ltd. v. Westminster Office Cleaning
Association (1944) 2 All ER 269 the plaintiff carried on a business of
cleaning the inferiors of offices and windows in the name of "Office Cleaning
Services Ltd.," The defendant carried on a similar business in the name of
"Office Cleaning Association". It was held therein that in the absence of any
fraudulent intention the differentiation between the words "Services" and
"Association", was sufficient to distinguish the defendant's business from
that of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's claim should be dismissed. The above
authorities cited by the appellant's learned Counsel lay down the principle
that if a trader makes use of a mere descriptive word to denote his business,
he cannot claim any monopoly right to the use of such a word. He takes the
risk of other people using similar words. In such a case, in order to sustain
his action he should further establish that the said name though descriptive
has acquired a secondary or distinctive meaning by which the goods or business
has come during a long courses of time to be associated with him. The learned
Counsel for the respondent drew our attention to Brestian v. Try (1958) R.P.C.
161. That was a case where the plaintiff did business as Ladies Hairdressers,
under the trade name, "Charles of London" from 1952. The defendant also
started in 1955 similar business in the name of "Charles of London". It was
held on a consideration of large volume of evidence that the plaintiff
acquired a goodwill in his business run under the said name and that he was
therefore, entitled to relief against the defendant by way of injunction in a
modified form. This decision is clearly distinguishable on the ground that it
was based upon the goodwill acquired by a person doing business by adopting a
proper noun.

44\. In Hindustan Radiators Co. v. Hindustan Radiators Ltd. , the learned
Single Judge observed thus:

"In an action for infringement of trademark or of passing off, in order to
establish a prima facie case for grant of ad interim injunction, it is
incumbent upon the plaintiff to show (a) that plaintiff has been using its
trading style and trademark for quite a long period and continuously whereas
the defendant has entered into the said field only recently, (b) that there
has not been much delay in the filing of the suit for injunction by the
plaintiff, (c) that the goods of the plaintiff have acquired a distinctiveness
and are associated in the mind of the general public as goods of the
plaintiff, (d) that nature of activity of the plaintiff and the defendant is
same or similar, (e) that the goods of the parties to which the trademark of
the plaintiff is associated are same or similar, (f) that the user of the said
trademark or trade name by the defendant is likely to deceive and cause
confusion in the public mind and injury to the business reputation of the
plaintiff, (g) that the sphere of activity and the market of consumption of
goods of the parties are the same, (h) that the customers of the plaintiff,
inter alia, include uneducated, illiterate and unwary customers who are
capable of being deceived or confused or misled. Unless plaintiff's trading
style or trade mark has become common property, it would be no defence for the
defendant that there are some other concerns who were also using similar
trading style or similar trade mark; as to whether it has become common
property is a question of fact in each case. The mere fact that the defendant
has got its name approved from the Registrar of Companies would not go against
the claim of the plaintiff in any manner whatsoever."

45\. In the Andhra Perfumery Works v. Karupakula Suryanarayanaiah, the 15
precedents on this aspect have been succinctly traced out in Para 8 and lastly
referring to the case of Corn Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food Products
Ltd. , held in paras 17 and 18 thus:

"17. Lastly, we may take note of a precedent of the Supreme Court in Corn
Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food Products Ltd. which has also been
quoted in the judgments before us. This passage approbates the statement of
law in Kerly, and explains the different situation of the same issue, whether
a Mark is common to the trade, which might arise in opposition proceedings. In
that context, the user of other Marks must be established by evidence.
Finally, on the aspect of the precedents, we may refer to Devidoss and Co.
Alathur Abboyee Chetty and Co. 1940-2 Mad.L.J 793 at pages 797 and 798 = (AIR
1941 Mad. 31 at p.33). This bears upon acquiescence on the analogy of the
dicta of Fry, J., in Willmott v. Barber, (1880) 15 Ch.D. 96 and the statement
of the law is:

"To support a plea of acquiescence in a trademark case, it must be shown that
the plaintiff has stood by for a substantial period and thus encouraged the
defendant to expend money in building up a business associated with the mark."

18\. We shall deal, in a more condensed form, with the citations which have
been placed before us from Kerly on Trade Marks (8th Edition, page 246),
Halsbury's Laws of England (Third Edition) Volume 38. Paragraphs 869 and 894
and Dr. Venkateswaran on Trade Marks Act (1963 Edition), these last passages
being cited from a number of pages of the work. In the present case, the
difficulty is partly that, in a context of this character, one has to be
careful to see that a circular argument does not emerge. Certainly, if there
is some evidence on record which shows that the Trademark or the word
"GANESH", with or without the variance of prefixes or suffixes, was used by
about forty traders in that area, as the appellant claims, then it would be
common to the trade; that may be so, ab initio. It that is the interpretation,
then the attempt of the respondent firm to register this mark, on the basis of
their business in Agarbathies built up from 1953 to 1960, must necessarily
fail. When a word is publici juris, like the word "DURBAR" which the
respondent firm disclaimed, there can be no registration, for there cannot be
distinctiveness. This is a question of fact, as Kerly points out (paragraph 3,
page 119). If, on the contrary, the word had attained distinctiveness as the
mark of the respondent firm, this distinctiveness may be lost. But, unless it
is lost, it is entitled to recognition. The loss may be due to abandonment,
acquiescence in successful piracy on a large scale, or a volume of common
user, which is public and which destroys distinctiveness. The Mark may be
publici juris in a particular branch of the trade only (Kerly, pages 245-246).
The occurrence of a few fraudulent infringements, without the knowledge of the
proprietor, will not make the mark common to the trade (Dr. Venkateswaran's
Treatise, pages 659 to 661). Again, mere disuse for a short period, may not
amount to abandonment. When rectification is attempted, the onus is on the
applicant to show that the Mark had lost its distinctiveness. There are
several authorities, including passages in Kerly, which need not be quoted
again here, clearly to the effect that mere surreptitious user, sporadic user,
piracy in a concealed manner against which action was taken or attempted by
the proprietor, when the piracies came to light, cannot possibly destroy the
distinctiveness earlier achieved."

46\. In Vishnudas Trading v. The Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd. 1997 IPLR 1, it
was held that the rival goods though under the same board brought
classification were clearly distinguished and separate articles. Registration
of Charminar trademark for manufacturing of Tobacco gave exclusive right to
the Registrant and for use on articles for broad classification, the
appellant's application for registration of the same mark for Quimam Zarda was
not allowed. However, that did not prevent the Assistant Registrar of
Trademarks for rectifying the registration and rectifying the registration
mark to which the goods on use Cigarette. Otherwise, it would lead to
trafficking in trademark. No registration could be take for absolutely
perpetual or invariable.

47\. In Corn Products Refining Company v. Shangrila Food Products Limited ,
the Supreme Court observed thus:

"An average purchase would, therefore, be likely to think that the
respondent's Gluvita biscuits' were made with the appellant's 'Glucovita'
glucose. This was the kind of trade connection between different goods which
is in the "Black magic" case (in re: an application by Edward Hact) 1940-58
RPC 91 was taken into consideration in arriving at the conclusion that there
was a likelihood of confusion or deception. The goods in this case were
chocolates and laxatives and it was proved that laxatives were often made with
chocolate coatings..."

48\. The Supreme Court in Vishnudas case (16 supra) further observed at paras
45, 46 and 47, which are extracted below:

"45. There is no manner of doubt that the varieties of articles made of
tobacco are differently used and they have their distinctive quality and
separate identity. These articles are also marketed as distinct articles of
use in different manner. In the common trade channel such articles are not
only held different and distinct articles but are marketed separately. It does
not require any imagination to hold that snuff or quiwam are entirely distinct
products and even though the said products and the cigarettes, beedi/s,
cheroot are also made of tobacco and all such products may come under the
broad classification 'manufactured tobacco', each of the said products is
always held as a distinct and separate article of use having its specific
characteristics.

46\. The respondent-Company got registration of its brand name "Charminar"
under the broad classification 'manufactured tobacco'. So long such
registration remains operatives, the respondent-Company is entitled to claim
exclusive use of the said brand name in respect of article made of tobacco
coming under the said broad classification 'manufactured tobacco'. Precisely
for the said reason, when the appellant made application for registration of
quiwam and zarda under the same brand name 'charminar', such prayer for
registration was not allowed. The appellant, therefore, made application for
rectification of the registration made in favour of the respondent-Company so
that the said registration is limited only in respect of the articles being
manufactured and marketed by the respondent-Company, namely, cigarettes. In
our view, if a trader or manufacture actually trades in or manufactures only
one or some of the articles coming under a broad classification and such
trader or manufacture has no bona fide intention to trade in or manufacture
other goods or articles which also fall under the said broad classification,
such trader or manufacturer should not be permitted to enjoy monopoly in
respect of all the articles which may come under such broad classification and
by that process preclude the other traders or manufacturers to get
registration of separate and distinct goods which may also be grouped under
the broad classification. If registration has been given generally in respect
of all the articles coming under the broad classification and if it is
established that the trader or manufacturer who got such registration had not
intended to use any other article except the articles being used by such
trader or manufacturer, the registration of such trader is liable to be
rectified by limiting the ambit or registration and confining such
registration to the specific article or articles which really concern the
trader or manufacturer enjoying the registration made in his favour. In our
view, if rectification in such circumstances is not allowed, the trader or
manufacturer by virtue of earlier registration will be permitted to enjoy the
mischief of trafficking in trademark, Looking to the Scheme of the
registration of trademark as envisaged in the Trademarks Act, and the Rules
framed thereunder, it appears to us that registration of a trademark cannot be
held to be absolute, perpetual and invariable under all circumstances. Section
12 of the Trademarks Act prohibits registration of identical or deceptively
similar trademark in respect of goods and description of goods which is
identical or deceptively similar to the trademark already registered. For
prohibiting registration under Section 12 (1), goods in respect of which
subsequent registration is sought for, must be (i) in respect of goods or
description of goods being same or similar and covered by earlier registration
and (ii) trademark claimed for such goods must be same or deceptively similar
to the trademark already registered. It may be noted here that under Sub-
Section (3) of Trademarks Act, in an appropriate case, of honest concurrent
use and/or of other special circumstances, same and deceptively similar
trademarks may be permitted to another by the Registrar, subject to such
conditions as may deem just and proper to the Registrar. It is also to be
noted that the expression "goods" and "description of goods" appearing in
Section 12(1) of Trademarks Act indicate that registration may be made in
respect of one or more goods or of all goods confirming to a general
description. The Trademarks Act has noted distinction between description of
goods forming a genus and separate and distinctly identifiable goods under the
genus in various other sections e.g., goods of same description in Section 46,
Sections 12 and 34 and class of goods in Section 18, Rules 12 and 26 read with
4th Schedule to the Rules framed under the Act.

47\. The "class" mentioned in the 4th Schedule may subsume or comprise a
number of goods or articles which are separately identifiable and vendible and
which are not goods of the same description as commonly understood in trade or
in common parlance. Manufactured tobacco is a class mentioned in Class 34 of
4th Schedule of the Rules but within the said class, there are number of
distinctly identifiable goods which are marked separately and also used
differently. In our view, it is not only permissible but it will be only just
and proper to register one or more articles under a class or genus if in
reality registration only in respect of such articles is intended, by
specifically mentioning the names of such articles and by indicating the class
under which such article or articles are to be comprised. It is therefore,
permissible to register only cigarette or some other specific products made of
'manufactured tobacco' as mentioned in Class 34 of the 4th Schedule of the
Rules. In our view, the contention of Mr. Vaidyanathan that in view of change
in the language of Section 8 of Trademarks Act as compared to Section 5 of
Trademarks Act, 1940, registration of trademark is to be made only in respect
of class or genus and not in respect of articles of different species under
the genus is based on incorrect appreciation of Section 8 of the Trademarks
Act and 4th Schedule of the Rules."

49\. The learned Single Judge of this Court in Syed Nizamuddin v. Golden
Tobacco Company Private Limited 1 PLR 1978 A.P. 135, held thus:

"(i) That in an action for passing off the protection extended not only to the
same kind of goods which the plaintiffs manufacture, but also to goods which
are allied or cognate in nature when the facts in a particular case show that
there is likelihood of deception namely that the consumers would think that
the goods of the defendants are of the manufacture or the products of the
plaintiff (ii) that to get relief in a passing off action besides showing that
the marks are deceptively similar it must be shown that on account of such
deceptive similarity the plaintiff is likely to suffer substantial damage and
(iii) that in the present case even assuming that there is a likelihood of
deception in that the customers might think that the cigarettes of the
defendant company are of the manufacture of the plaintiffs, it was not shown
that by reason of that deception the plaintiff is likely to suffer any
substantial damage."

50\. In Ellora Industries, Delhi v. Banarasi Dass Goela , the learned Single
Judge held thus:

"The purpose of tort of passing off is to protect commercial goodwill; to
ensure that people's business reputations are not exploited. Since business
"goodwill" is an asset, and therefore/species of property the law protects it
against encroachment as such. The tort is based on economic policy, the need
to encourage enterprise and to ensure commercial stability. It secures a
reasonable area of monopoly to traders. It is thus complimentary to trademark
law which is founded upon statute rather than common law. But there is a
difference between statute law relating to trademarks and the passing off
action; for, while registration of relevant mark, itself gives title to the
registered owner, the onus in a passing off action lies upon the plaintiff to
establish the existence of the business reputation which he seeks to protect.
The asset protected is the reputation, the plaintiff's business has in the
relevant market. This is a complex thing. It is manifested in the various
indicia which lead the client or customer to associate the business with the
plaintiff; such as the name of the business, whether real or adopted, the
mark, design, make-up or colour of the plaintiffs' goods, the distinctive
characteristics of services he supplies or the nature of his special
processes. And it is sound encroachments upon such indicia that passing off
actions arise. What is protected is an economic asset. The plaintiff must
establish that his business or goods have acquired the reputation he alleges,
and this can be done by showing that a substantial proportion of people who
are likely to become purchasers of the goods of the kind in question associate
the name with them. The weight of this burden must vary according to the
facts. It is the tendency to mislead or confuse that thus forms the gist of
action; and the plaintiff need not establish fraud, nor that any one was
actually deceived, or that he actually suffered damage. The tort is thus (like
label) actionable per se. Indeed the forms bf passing off, like the forms of
nuisances, are infinite. Loss of sales is not the only form of probable injury
that will suffice, loss of reputation has been accepted as sufficient. Law
protects all intangible elements of value and it is not always necessary that
there must be in existence goods of that other man with which the defendant
seeks to confuse his own.

The plaintiffs were registered proprietors of trademark 'Elora' in respect of
watches, timepieces, clock and their parts. The plaintiffs sold clocks but
intended to introduce timepieces. Defendants manufactured time pieces with
their distinctive mark 'Gargon' but their business name was 'Ellora
Industries' used conspicuously by them in advertisements etc., as part of
their business name."

The learned Judge held thus:

"On facts that it was a case of passing off and also of infringement of
registered trademark of plaintiffs. The use of the word 'Elora' by the
defendants was indicative of a warm intimacy with "the plaintiffs. The
registered trademark 'Elora' was known to the trade and the word 'Elora'
lurked and lingered in the minds of the customers minded to obtain goods of
that mark. The word appeals to the ear than eye. There was a real and tangible
risk of damage, the field of activity being common. The wrongful appropriation
of trade reputation was an injury to plaintiffs. That injury and the
acknowledged intention to continue to inflict it was ample justification for
the injunction."

51\. While dealing with the word deceptively similar to Division Bench of
Gujarat High Court, in Simatul Chemical Industries Private Limited v. Cibatul
Ltd. , it was observed thus:

"Where no trademarks are used for the products and a manufacturer complains
that the likely customer of his goods is apt to be confused by the similarity
between the name of his company and the name of some other company which has
subsequently, started production, though the Court has to apply the test
whether such hypothetical consumer 'would be confused in selecting the goods
of the rival companies by the similarities in their names, the Court has
ultimately to form its own opinion on the matter.

The test to be applied is the test of an average person with imperfect
recollection. The Court has to visualize a customer or a tradesman or a
citizen who may happen to have dealings with the company complaining or who
may happen to want to purchase the goods manufactured by such company and
decide whether such a customer or tradesman or citizen would get confused. It
would not be right to apply the test of a man of extraordinary memory who
remembers the spelling of the name of each company or a person who jots down
meticulously and methodically the names of companies in his diary and brings
out his diary and contemplates whether he is dealing with one company or the
other."

52\. On question of likelihood of confusion in case of deceptively similar
goods, the learned Single Judge of Bombay High Court in Astra-Idl Limited v.
T.T.K. Pharma Limited , held thus:

"The question of likelihood of confusion has to be decided by comparison of
marks as a whole. The totality of the mark is required to be considered to
hold as to whether or not the mark is deceptively similar. In deciding whether
the word 'Betalong' is deceptively similar to the word 'Betaloc', each of the
two words must be taken as a whole word. The words are so similar that there
is reasonable probability of confusion between the words both from the visual
and phonetic point of view. It is not a matter for microscopic inspection, but
to be taken from the general and even casual point of view of a customer
walking into a shop. Even if proper attention is paid to the termination of
the marks, the likelihood of confusion being caused cannot be ruled out. The
mark 'Betaloc' is too near and so similar to the mark 'Betalong' as to make
the confusion likely. Phonetically, visually and structurally both the marks
are similar. Actual deception is not necessary to be proved. What is material
is likelihood of deception.

In the present circumstances, doctor's prescription factor has lost its
importance since the reality of the situation cannot be ignored. In India
scheduled drugs which are to be sold under doctor's prescription are even sold
without production of doctor's prescription and as such reduces the weightage
that can be given to this aspect of the matter while considering the question
of deceptive similarity. The marks 'Betaloc' and 'Betalong' being visually,
phonetically and structurally similar, and so close to each other that it
outweighs the weightage to be given to the factor that the goods are scheduled
drugs."

In regard to unrelated goods the plaintiff could imitate action for passing
off on the ground that 'Bata' was a fancy name and it was a surname of the
person who started the business. (See: Bata India Ltd. v. Pyarelal and Co.).

53\. Similarly in Daimlerbenz Aktiegesellschaft v. Hybo Hindustan , the
learned Single Judge observed thus:

"There are names and marks which have become household words, "Benz" as name
of a Car would be known to every family that has ever used a quality car. The
name "Benz" as applied to a car, has a unique place in the world. There is
hardly one who is conscious of existence of the cars/ automobiles who would
not recognize the name "Benz" used in connection with cars. Thus the boxes in
which the defendant sells its undergarments for men, and the representation
thereon is for a man with his legs separated and hands joined together above
his shoulder, all within a circle, indicate, the strong suggestion of the link
between the three pointed star of "Mercedes Benz" car and the undergarments
sold by the defendant. This cannot be considered to be a "honest concurrent
user" by the defendant of the above said symbol. Therefore, the defendant
could be restrained from using the word "Benz" with reference to any underwear
which is manufactured by them, and injunction could be issued restraining the
defendant to cease and desist from carrying on trade in any undergarments in
the name of "Benz" and "Three Pointed Human Being in a Ring", forthwith.

The Trademark law is not intended to protect a person who deliberately sets
out to take the benefit of somebody else's reputation with reference to goods,
especially so when the reputation extends world wide. By no stretch of
imagination can it be said that use for any length of time of the name "Benz"
should be not objected to."

54\. In a recent case Aktiebolaget Volvo of Sweden v. Volvosteels Ltd. of
Gujarat (India) 1998 (Suppl.) Arb.L.R. 627 the learned Single Judge surveyed
various decisions on the ground of deceptive similarity and likely to cause
confusion and observed at para 61 as follows:

"It is also clear to us that as a matter of law the "common field of activity"
is not required to be established. However, as the crux of passing off action
lies in possible deception, the existence of common field of activities always
relevant consideration. If there is common field of activity; possibility of
deception is very high and if there is no common field of activity possibility
may be less, but it cannot be laid down as a rule of law that there can be no
possibility at all. Thirdly, and more importantly, all these issues ultimately
will depend on the facts and circumstances and the material on record of each
particular case, as to whether the plaintiff has established the goodwill or
reputation, whether the plaintiff has established the transborder reputation,
whether the defendant has caused misrepresentation innocently or deliberately
and whether the plaintiff has suffered damage or is likely to suffer damage in
quia timet action. These will be questions of fact to be determined by the
Court. It is also clear that if it is shown that the defendant intended to
deceive, the burden would be much lighter on the part of the plaintiff. The
existence of unexpected and unexplained similarities between the goods of the
defendant and the plaintiff or lack of explanation or false explanation for
adoption of name by the defendant, may be extremely relevant."

Descriptive words, exclusive user/ secondary meaning:

55\. The Madras High Court in Coromandel Fertilizers Ltd. v. Coromandel
Cements Ltd. 1989 I PLR 105, held in para 8 as follows:

"Now to the question of passing off. Passing off is a common law action
against a person restraining him from passing off his goods as and for the
goods of another, whether the goods are of the same or of different kind by
using the trademark or the trade style of the other. It is strenuously
contended by the learned Counsel for the plaintiff-applicant that the
applicant has been manufacturing and marketing fertilizers under the name.
'Coromandel Fertilizers' since 1961, that its product has obtained a special
reputation in the market, that the applicant is manufacturing and selling
cement under the same name from 1984, that the user by the defendant of the
name 'Coromandel' for its cement is likely to cause confusion in the minds of
the public, that the public will be made to believe that the defendant-Company
is associated with the plaintiff-Company and would lead the people to accept
the defendant's goods on the faith of the plaintiff's reputation and the
defendant must therefore, be restrained from using the word 'Coromandel' for
its cement. This, in essence, is a passing off action and inasmuch as the
applicant has given up its relief for passing off in the plaint, it is not
entitled to any interim injunction. Secondly, the word 'Coromandel' is not a
word of Article. It is not a fancy name of an invented term from the
geographical name denoting the East Coast of South India and is therefore,
incapable of acquiring distinctive in general in respect of all businesses and
trades. The applicant cannot, therefore, claim the right of exclusive user of
the word 'Coromandel' for whatever business it may carry on or whatever goods
it may manufacture. This is obvious from the fact that several companies and
concerns with the name 'Coromandel' are doing various kinds of business for
example Coromandel Corporation Private Limited, Coromandel Enterprises Private
Limited, Coromandel Electronics Private Limited, Coromandel Engineering
Private Limited, Coromandel Garments Limited, Coromandel Industries Private
Limited, Coromandel Leather Private Limited, Coromandel Oil Private Limited,
Coromandel Prodorite Private Limited, Coromandel Steels Limited, as is seen
from the telephone directory. The word can however acquire distinctiveness in
respect of a particular trade or goods. The plaintiff as the user of this word
for the purpose of fertilisers since 1961 is entitled to claim exclusive user
of the word in the manufacture and sale of fertilisers. But, it cannot claim
such a right of exclusive user in respect of cement which it has started
manufacturing only in 1984 on the other hand, it is the defendant which has
registered its name as 'Coromandel Cements Limited' in 1978 itself though it
has not yet started production. By virtue of prior adoption, it is the
defendant who can claim the right of exclusive user of the word 'Coromandel'
for cement. The plaintiff is not therefore, entitled to any injunction
restraining the defendant from using the word 'Coromandel' for its cement"

56\. The Delhi High Court in Relaxo Rubber Limited v. Aman Cable Industries
1998 (2) ARB 709, it was held thus:

"When a mark is used consisting of a purely descriptive word or words it
cannot be said that a case of passing of has been made out. Words 'relaxon' or
'relax' adding thereto a vowel 'o' are dictionary words and more or less
purely descriptive in nature. Thus the said words cannot be said to be
invented by the plaintiffs. Since the nature of trading and the goods dealt
with by the plaintiffs and the defendants are distinct and separate having no
connection with each other at all and since the trademark of the plaintiffs is
held to be not an invented word it cannot be said that a case of passing off
has been made out by the plaintiffs on the user of the defendants of the same
trademark in relation to its goods of wires, cables and PVC pipes. Even
otherwise the defendants have placed on record the documents indicating the
defendants dealing with the mark 'Relaxo' for last about 8 years, the bills
and the receipts place on record indicate that the aforesaid mark is being
used atleast from 25-12-1993 and the suit was filed in the year 1997. Thus,
there was also delay on the part of the plaintiffs in approaching this Court.
The plaintiff has to bring an action of passing off immediately."

57\. In Victory Transport Co. Pvt. Ltd., Ghaziabad v. The District Judge,
Ghaziabad it was observed as follows:

"In regard to a "passing off" action according to settled law, there are
broadly two tests which have to be applied for determining the question
whether the plaintiff is entitled to an injunction. The tests are:-

(1) Whether the words used in the trade name of the plaintiff are mere
descriptive words of common use or have they come to acquire a distinctive or
secondary meaning in connection with the plaintiff's business so that the use
of those words in the trade name adopted by another was likely to deceive the
public? The test relates to the reputation, which the plaintiff claims for
itself.

(2) Whether there is a reasonable probability that the use of the name adopted
by the defendant was likely to mislead the customers of the plaintiff by
reason of similarity of the two trade names.

In order to succeed the plaintiff has to establish both these things. The
Court shall insist on a very high standard of proof before it would grant
injunction in favour of the plaintiffs, in view of the seriousness of the
repercussions, which such an injunction is bound to have on the rights of the
defendants. The injunction prayed for in such cases prohibits the defendants
altogether from carrying on their existing business under a trade name adopted
by it at the instance of a plaintiff whose claim is founded on no more than
such illusive concepts as "reputation" or goodwill and so forth. In the cases
of infringement of trademarks, the right is founded on registration of the
mark, which per se is property. It must be borne in mind that in the case of
an action on infringement of a trademark in view of the statutory provisions,
a similarity in the trademarks is per se actionable. In passing off actions,
however, the plaintiff has to prove further, that his trade name has by
reputation and use, come to acquire a secondary meaning indicating
distinctiveness and quality of the business being carried on by him."

58\. In Indo-Pharma Pharmaceutical Works Limited, Mumbai v. Citadel Fine
Pharmaceuticals Limited, Madras 1999 (1) Arb.L.R. 227, the Madras High Court
recorded the following conclusions:

"The word 'Enerj' is an abbreviation of a generic name 'energy'. The word
'energy' is a commonly used word and would be the description of energising
product. A generic name of a product cannot be treated as a trademark to
indicate the origin. The prefix for both the mark, viz., 'Enerj' is common to
the trade and cannot be a proprietary name. Nobody can claim exclusive right
to use such an abbreviation.

As per the suffix phonetically, the words 'Jex' and 'Jase' are totally
dissimilar and are not going to create any confusion in the mind of the users
especially, in this case, when the visual impression of the said two trade
names is completely different.

In fact, we have compared the two words as a whole with the eye of the public.
We think prima facie that the total sound effect on there two words lacks any
similarity. So also, when these words are written down and compared, they do
not have any similarity which can deceive the eye of the layman."

59\. In R.S.K.V. Raghavan Trading as R.S. Krishbna and Company, Mayuram v.
G.R. Gopal and Company AIR 1981 Mad. 262, it was held thus:

"When a distinctive label is registered as a whole as a trademark such
registration cannot give an exclusive statutory fight to the proprietor of the
trademark to the use of any particular word or name contained therein apart
from the mark as a whole. Therefore, where the applicant manufacture medicinal
oil under the registered trademark consisting of a label containing the word
"Thennamarakkudi" along with other words applied for rectification of the
respondent's registered trademark containing the words "Thennamarakkudi oil"
on the ground that the same was a clear infringement of his mark and its use
was likely to cause deception or confusion in the minds of the purchasing
public, the applicant must establish that the word 'Thennamarakkudi' had been
used in his registered label to distinguish his goods from those of others.
'Thennamarakkudi' being geographical name the applicant could claim a
trademark in that name only if he establishes that the geographical name has
acquired a distinctive character and has been associated with his goods and
therefore, is a distinctive mark for his goods. When several merchants were
manufacturing similar medicinal oil preparation called 'Thennamarakkudi oil'
and the preparation itself took its name from the village Thennamarakkudi' in
Nannilam Taluk the applicant could not claim exclusive right to the use of
those words in his registered label. Even assuming that the applicant used the
word 'Thennamarakkudi' to show the distinctive character of his medicinal
preparation that expression must be taken to have become public jurisdiction
as it had subsequently been used by persons making similar medicinal off
preparations and the right of the applicant to the trademark must be taken to
have gone since nobody could be deceived by the use of it or can be induced
from the use of it to believe that he is buying the goods of the original
traders. More over, since there was no separate registration of the word
'Thennamarakkudi' as a trademark the applicant cannot be taken to have
acquired a proprietary right in that word though he might have acquired the
proprietary right in the label by its registration especially when
'Thennamarakkudi' is a geographical name not shown to have been used to
distinguish the medicinal oil prepared by the applicant. Therefore, the
applicant was not entitled to claim rectification."

In Teju Singh's case (13th cited supra) observed thus:

6\. The test whether words are descriptive has been laid down in Corpus Juris
Secundum, Vol.87 in paras 34 and 35, at page 271 as follows:

"The true test in determining whether a particular name or phrase is
descriptive is whether, as it is commonly used, it is reasonably indicative
and descriptive of the thing intended. In order to be descriptive, within the
condemnation of the rule, it is sufficient if information is afforded as to
the general nature or character of the articles and it is not necessary that
the words or marks used shall comprise a clear, complete, and accurate
description. The meaning which should be given is the impression and
signification which are conveyed to the Pubic. Whether words or marks claimed
as trademarks are descriptive or whether they are suggestive or arbitrary and
fanciful must be decided with respect to the articles to which they are
applied and the mark must be considered as a whole.

An exclusive trademark must consist of some arbitrary or fanciful term,
figure, or device, and words or phrases, in order to constitute a trademark,
must be used in purely arbitrary or fanciful way was applied to the goods in
question. Words or marks are arbitrary or fanciful when they do not, by their
usual and ordinary meaning, denote or describe products to which they are
applied, but rather come to indicate their purposes by application and
association."

60\. With regard to the acquisition of secondary or special meaning, the Bench
observed in para 8 as follows:

"The next question for consideration is whether the words "One day" have
acquired any secondary or special meaning in connection with the plaintiff's
business. On this aspect of the case the learned Judge held that the
plaintiff's trade name being a distinctive name, it is no longer necessary to
prove that the name acquired any reputation. Even in the case of a distinctive
mark when the action is one for a passing off under common law, it should be
proved that the plaintiff established reputation. It is only in an action for
the infringement of a trademark that the plaintiff can succeed merely by proof
of infringement of a mark and nothing more. The authorities are clear that in
the case of a descriptive name the plaintiff has to further prove that the
words acquired a secondary meaning and that the plaintiff is associated with
the said name. The plaintiff has not given any particulars as to how the words
acquired any such meaning. No other evidence has been adduced to show that the
words "One day" have acquired any reputation in the locality as to identify
the same with the plaintiff's business. P.W.2 has been examined to show that
when he saw the signboards of the plaintiff and the defendant, he was led to
believe that the plaintiff and the defendant are the same. He stated that if a
servant goes to the shop it is difficult for him to distinguish one from the
other."

Acquiescence / Delays / Laches:

61\. In Hindustan Pencils Pvt. Ltd. v. India Stationery Products Co. , the
learned Single Judge observed thus:

"Even though there may be some doubt as to whether laches or acquiescence can
deny the relief of a permanent injunction, it has been consistently held that
if the defendant acts fraudulently with the knowledge that he is violating the
plaintiff's rights then in that case, even if there is an inordinate delay on
the part of the plaintiff in taking action against the defendant, the relief
of injunction is not denied. Where there is an honest concurrent user by the
defendant then inordinate delay or laches may defeat the claim of damages or
rendition of accounts but the relief of injunction should not be refused. This
is so because it is the interest of the general public, which is the third
party in such cases, which has to be kept in mind. In the case of inordinate
delay or laches, as distinguished from the case of an acquiescence, the main
prejudice which may be caused to the defendant is that by reason of the
plaintiff not acting at an earlier point of time the defendant has been able
to establish his business by the using the infringing mark. Inordinate delay
or laches may be there because the plaintiff may not be aware of the
infringement by the defendant or the plaintiff may consider such infringement
by the defendant as not being serious enough to hurt the plaintiff's business.
Nevertheless, if the Court comes to the conclusion that prejudice is likely to
be caused to the general public who may be mislead in to buying the goods
manufactured by the defendant thinking them to be the goods of the plaintiff
then an injunction must be issued. The Court may, in appropriate cases, allow
some time to the defendants to sell off their existing stock but an injunction
should not be denied."

62\. In Kirloskar Proprietary Ltd. v. Kirloskar Dimensions Pvt. Ltd. , it was
held thus:

"34. In order to consider the balance of convenience and the damage it is
necessary to consider the facts relating to acquiescence, delay and that of
confusion that may be created in the minds of the public in order to ascertain
the damage that may be caused to the plaintiffs. The Trial Court considering
the correspondence between the Mysore Kirloskar and that of the Kirloskar
Systems Ltd. with that of the 1st defendant-Company has recorded a finding
that the plaintiffs are aware of the incorporation of the 1st defendant-
Company. It is an admitted fact that the Mysore Kirloskar entrusted the video
filming to the first defendant-Company. Therefore, it cannot be said that
there is no delay on the part of the plaintiffs in bringing action for passing
of immediately after the incorporation of the first defendant company. It is
also an admitted fact that the plaintiffs through one of its group of
companies as started earlier the plaintiffs has entrusted the work of video
filming to the 1st defendant. In view of this fact, the learned Counsel for
the 1st defendant contended that the plaintiffs have acquiesced in their
conduct in allowing the defendants to start their business and therefore, the
plaintiffs are not entitled for any interim relief. The advocate for the
plaintiffs submitted that in order to apply the principles of acquiescence the
defendant is required to satisfy certain conditions as held in the decision of
Willmott v. Barber (Vol.XV Ch.D. 96), as follows:

"It requires very strong evidence to introduce the Court to derive a man of
his legal right when he has expressly stipulated that he shall be bound only
by a written document. It has been said that the acquiescence which will
deprive a man of his legal rights must amount to fraud, and in my view that is
an abbreviated statement of a very true proposition. A man is not to be
deprived of his legal rights unless he has acted in such a way as would make
it fraudulent for him to set up those rights. What, then, are the elements or
requisites necessary to constitute fraud of that description? In the first
place the plaintiff must have made a mistake as to his legal rights. Secondly,
the plaintiff must have expended some money or must have done some act (not
necessarily upon the defendant's land) on the faith of his mistaken belief.
Thirdly, the defendant, the possessor of the legal right, must know of the
existence of his own right which is inconsistent with the right claimed by the
plaintiff. If he does not know of it he is in the same position as the
plaintiff, and the doctrine of acquiescence is founded upon conduct with a
knowledge of your legal rights. Fourthly, the defendant, the possessor of the
legal right, must know of the plaintiff's mistaken belief of his rights. If he
does not, there is nothing which calls upon his to assert his own rights.
Lastly, the defendant, the possessor of the legal right, must have encouraged
the plaintiff in his expenditure of money or in the other acts which he has
done, either directly or by abstaining from asserting his legal right. Where
all these elements exist, there is fraud of such a nature as will entitle the
Court to restrain the possessor of the legal right from exercising it, but, in
my judgment, nothing short of this will do."

In the above said case no doubt the person pleading acquiescence shall prove
certain conditions. But, in my opinion the said decision has no application at
this stage for the purpose of considering interim prayer. As pleaded in the
trial. No doubt it is open to the defendant to prove or establish acquiescence
as pleaded in the trial. What is required to be considered at this stage is
the conduct of the parties. The Counsel for the appellants that the plaintiffs
cited another decision in the case of Power Control Appliances v. Sumeet
Machines Pvt. Ltd. , wherein it was held as follows:

"26. Acquiescence is sitting; by, when another is invading the rights and
spending money on it. It is a course of conduct inconsistent with the claim
for exclusive rights in a trademark, trade name etc., it implies positive
acts; not merely silence or inaction such as is involved in laches. In
Harcourt v. White (1860) 28 Beav. 303 Sir, John Romilly said: "It is important
to distinguish mere negligence and acquiescence." Therefore, acquiescence is
one facet of delay. If the plaintiff stood by knowingly and let the defendants
built up an important trade until it had become necessary to crush it, then
the plaintiffs would be stopped by their acquiescence. If the acquiescence in
the infringement amounts to consent, it will be a complete defence as was laid
down in Mouson (J.G.) & Co. v. Boem. The acquiescence must be such as to lead
to the inference of a licence sufficient to create a new right in the
defendant as was laid down in Rodgers v. Nowill."

In the instant case as held earlier the plaintiffs knew that the 1st defendant
incorporated as company in the year 1990 itself. The plaintiffs themselves
through one of the group of companies entrusted certain work to the 1st
defendant-Company. This fact clearly shows that the 1st defendant has
established its business and started carrying on business from the year 1990.
Hence, the decision referred to above in my opinion helps the defendants and
not the plaintiffs. In the instant case also the plaintiffs knowing fully well
that the defendants started their business from the year 1990 onwards stood by
and let the defendant to build up their trade till the date of filing of the
suit. Hence, I hold that the conduct of the plaintiffs in keeping quiet till
the defendants have established their business disentitles the interim relief
in their favour.

35\. No doubt the delay in bringing the action itself may not come in the way
of granting an order of injunction in favour of the plaintiffs as per the
decision , cited by the Counsel for the plaintiffs. In the instant case if
both the plaintiffs and defendants are not engaged in the common field of
activity and there is no material to show that the defendants are passing off
their goods or business representing as that of the goods or business of the
plaintiffs and therefore, there is no immediate threat of causing any damage
to the plaintiffs.

36\. As observed by me earlier, the plaintiffs and defendants are not engaged
in the common field of activity. The business of the defendant is altogether
different from that of the business of the plaintiffs as on the date of the
filing of the suit. It is also not the case of the defendants that they have
taken any steps to start the business which is being carried on by the
plaintiffs.

63\. In Power Control Appliances v. Sumeet Machines Private Limited , the
Supreme Court held thus:

"Acquiescence is sitting by, when another is invading the right and spending
money on it. It is a course of conduct inconsistent with the claim for
exclusive right in a trademark, trade name etc. It implies positive acts, not
merely silence or inaction such as is involved in laches. If the plaintiff
stood by knowingly and let the defendant built upon important trade until it
had become necessary to crush it, then the plaintiffs would be stopped by
their acquiescence. The Director of the first respondent-Company is the son of
the owner of the appellant who is the inventor of the artistic design. They
have been closely associated as family members in various concerns. There is
evidence of sale of equipment manufactured by the Appellant, but there is no
evidence of their manufacture by the first respondent. There is no plea of
assignment of copyright. The denial of injunction by High Court cannot be
supported. Injunction allowed.

Mere silence and inaction as is the case in laches does not constitute
acquiescence. There should be some positive act to indicate consent. Where
there is no evidence of assignment of copyright, injunction cannot be
refused."

64\. In Cluett Peabody and Company Inc. v. Mcintyre Hogg Marsh and Co. Ltd.
1958 RPC 335, it was observed thus:

"The remedy sought is after all equitable, and delay on the part of the
plaintiffs of great length with full knowledge of the facts must in principle
affect the plaintiffs' right to relief. What are the facts here? The
defendants have used the offending word and device continuously for more than
sixty years (including the years of both wars) before issues of the writ. The
plaintiffs have known of the defendants' use of the device since 1911 forty-
two years before writ and almost certainly of the word from the same time.

The true principle is to be found in the judgment of Sri Barnes Peacock in
Lindsay Petroleum Co. v. Hurd (1874) 5 P.C. 221 at P.239.

"Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of equity is not an arbitrary or a
technical doctrine. Where it would be practically unjust to give a remedy,
either because the party has, buy his conduct, done that which might fairly be
regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it. Or where by his conduct and neglect
he has, though perhaps not waiving that remedy, yet put the other party in a
situation in which it would not be reasonable to place him if the remedy were
afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases, lapse of time and delay
are most material. In every case, if an argument against relief, which
otherwise would be just is founded upon mere delay, that delay of course not
amounting to a bar by any statute of limitation, the validity of that defence
must be tried upon principles substantially equitable. Two circumstances,
always important in such cases are the length of the delay and the nature of
the acts done during the interval, which might affect either party and cause
balance of justice or injustice in taking the one course or the other so far
as relates to the remedy."

Honest Consumer User:

65\. The Calcutta High Court in J & W Hardie Ltd. v. Joseph E. Seagram and
Sons Inc. 1991 IPLR 2555, held thus:

"Dismissing the appeal the Court held:

"that there was no need to interfere with the Registrar's decision to allow
concurrent user since, according to evidence furnished by the respondent and
in the absence of evidence to substantiate the contentions of the Appellant,
it was clear that the appellant's mark was not used in India since 1947
whereas the respondent could substantiate sales to parties in India with
documentary evidence of honest concurrent user atleast from 1969 if not
earlier."

66\. In Maekawa Bearing Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. Onkar Bearing Industries
1997 PTR 147, the Delhi High Court was held that a person manufacturing and
selling for over 25 years can be said to be a onus concurrent user and it
cannot be said that he has a mala fide user.

Related Goods/Common field of activity:

67\. In Kirloskar Diesel Recon Pvt. Ltd. v. Kirloskar Proprietary Limited ,
the principles that common field of activity was not necessary in the passing
off action was accepted on the principles laid down in Aktiebolaget Volvo's
case (20th cited supra), Daimler Bern's case (19th cited supra), and M/s.
Victory Transport's case (23rd cited supra). The learned Judge also referred
to certain foreign decisions in para 13, which is extracted below:

"The expression 'common field of activity' was coined by Wynne-Parry J. in Mc.
Colloch v. Levis A. May (Product Distributors) Ltd. popularly known as 'Uncle
Mac' case reported in 65 RPC 58 in which he held that its presence or absence
was conclusive in determining whether or not there was passing off. However,
the requirement that a 'common field of activity' is conclusive in determining
whether there can be passing off has been extensively criticised by Manning J.
in the case of Henderson v. Radio Corporation Pty. Reported in (1969) RPC 218
holding that it would be unsafe to adopt the view expressed in Mc. Culloch v.
Mary that what has been called a common field of activity must be established
in every case to entitle the plaintiff to succeed. He further held that it is
going too far to say that the absence of this so called common field of
activity necessarily bars a plaintiff from relief. With the passage of time,
law on requirement of common field of activity in a passing off action has
radically changed. There is no requirement for a common field of activity to
found a claim in passing off. In Marage Studies v. Counter Feat Clothing Co.
Ltd. reported in (1991) FSR 145, Browne Wilkison V-C said that the so called
requirement of the law that there should be a common field of activity is now
discredited. The real question in each case is whether there is as a result of
misrepresentation a real likelihood of confusion or deception of the public
and consequent damage to the plaintiff. The focus is shifted from the external
objective test of making comparison of activities of parties to the state of
mind of public in deciding whether it will be confused. With the passage of
time and reputation acquired, the trademark 'Kirloskar' has acquired the
secondary meaning and has become almost a household word. The judgments relied
upon by Mr. Kane pertain to the cases of one type of business and not where
variety of businesses have been carried by the plaintiff and defendant as in
the instant case. The business activities of the respondents vary from pin to
piano as borne out from the object clauses of the Memorandum of Association of
the respondents. The appellants have still to commence their business
activities but as mentioned in the Memorandum of Association of 1st appellant
in each appeal, some of the object clauses therein over Land Acquisition
proceedings with the activities of respondents and more particularly of
respondents Nos. 6 and 7."

68\. The learned Single Judge of Bombay High Court in Reliance Industries
Limited v. Reliance Polycrete Limited 1997 I PLR 418, the High Court observed
at para 21 as follows:

"Even otherwise, the defendants are not manufacturing or selling any items
manufactured by the plaintiff-Company. The only common item which could be
shown was polyester resin. In my view, the undertaking given by Mr. Nair on
behalf of his clients that the polyester resin would only be manufactured for
personal consumption and would not be sold in the market under the mark
"Reliance" is sufficient protection. This undertaking is accepted. The
defendants are manufacturing sanitary wares. It is not the plaintiffs' case
that they or any of their group companies are; manufacturing sanitary wares.
Thus there is no common field of activity. As the "Reliance" is not Synonymous
with the plaintiff's or their group companies in all fields of activities,
even a man of average intelligence and imperfect recollection would not
confuse sanitary wares manufactured by defendants to be those of plaintiffs or
a company associated with the plaintiffs. The principles laid down in
Kirloskar's case (30 supra) would also not apply here because the word is not
a household word associated with the plaintiffs only. Further, no question
arises from protecting the public or public interest. If anything public
interest requires that a big company like the plaintiffs be not allowed to
flex its muscles and try and oust all others from use of a word which is a
common word in English language and which is commonly used by a very large
number of companies/firms in various fields of activities."

69\. The Delhi High Court in Procter and Gamble Co. U.S.A. v. Procter and
Gamble Godrej Ltd., Mumbai 1997 I PLR 53, held thus:

"(1) The plaintiffs had not established any reputation in India for the
trademark Safeguard on the basis of which they could claim that the mark had
acquired secondary meaning so as to identify the mark exclusively with their
soap.

(2) The plaintiffs had not raised any objection to defendant's selling its
Safeguard antiseptic cream from 1984 despite the fact that the Ayurvedic cream
was advertised in a large scale in prominent places in India.

(3) The defendants has not fabricated or falsified any documents, as alleged
by the plaintiffs, to prove the extent of its sales.

(4) The plaintiffs' mark was not an invented word and they had failed to
substantiate their claim to proprietorship based on acquired reputation and
goodwill.

(5) The plaintiffs' failure to take timely action to file the suit was sought
to be justified by averment in the plaint that the defendants had come into
the market "recently" thus feigning ignorance of the present of defendant's
'Safeguard' brand cream for more than ten years in the Indian market."

Specific Relief Act:

70\. In Cot ton Corporation of India Limited v. United Industrial Bank Limited
, the Supreme Court observed as follows:

"The Court can in appropriate cases grant temporary injunction in exercise of
its inherent power in cases not covered by Order 39 CPC. But, while exercising
this inherent power, the Court should not overlook the statutory provision
which clearly indicates that injunction to restrain initiation of proceeding
cannot be granted. Section 41(b) is one such provision. And it must be
remembered that inherent power of the Court cannot be invoked to nullify or
stultify a statutory provision."

71\. On consideration of entire case law on the issue relating to passing off
action, the following principles would emerge:

(a) The concept of passing off which is a form of tort has undergone sea
change with the passage of time. Originally it was restricted to the
representation of one person's goods as those of another. Later it was
extended to business, service, profession and non-trading activities. Now it
is applied to many forms of unfair trading and unfair competition where the
activities of one person cause damage or injury to the goodwill associated
with the activities of another person.

(b) In a suit for passing off action, the plaintiff shall have to establish
that the defendant has been passing off his goods as the goods of plaintiff.

(c) The goods should have deceptive similarity likely cause confusion in the
mind of consumer. The plaintiff should establish deceptive similarity so as to
cause confusion in the mind of consumer and also likely sufferance of
substantial damages either to his business fiscally or to the reputation and
goodwill of his trade.

(d) Actual fraud or deception need not be proved.

(e) Action for passing off lies in respect of related goods as well as
unrelated goods. Common field of activity is not necessary. But, however,
chances of confusion are remote in unrelated goods.

(f) The plaintiff must establish that he has build up good reputation and
goodwill on the trademark.

(g) In assessing the degree of confusion or deceptive similarity, the
conclusion which an ordinary man of average intelligence should be kept in
view.

(h) In case of descriptive mark, the plaintiff has to prove secondary meaning.

(i) The plaintiff will be denied the relief in case of acquiescence and
laches.

(j) To avoid action for passing off, the defendant may plead first and
continuous user of mark with the knowledge of plaintiff.

(k) The defendant may also plead honest user for long period.

72\. The public interest has to be kept in view while dealing with the passing
off action viz., whether the public is deceived or confused.

73\. Whether there was a deception or likelihood of confusion, or
misrepresentation or whether there was dissimilarities in essential features
of the mark, whether there was damage to the business or its reputation
/goodwill are all pure questions of facts and the burden is on the plaintiff
to establish. No general yardstick can be fixed. Each case depends on its own
merits depending on the evidence adduced by the parties.

74\. In the case on hand, the plaintiff has been using the mark Eenadu from
1974 on the Telugu Newspaper. The name of Eenadu is a common word and unless
it becomes a household name, it cannot successfully establish passing off
action. The plaintiff deals in newspaper, T.V., Hotel, Chit Funds etc.,
whereas the defendant deals in Agafbathis only. Therefore, it is not a case of
similar goods. The principle of deceptive similarity and likelihood of
confusion in this case is too remote. The name Eenadu may be common
phonetically. But, visual similarity and the type of goods are quite different
and distinct. The word Eenadu is being claimed as trademark of plaintiff. But,
it is to be noted that the Agarbathis sachet contained Ashikavari Eenadu
incense sticks and in fact number of other names are being used by the
defendant. Even though the newspaper and the incense sticks are sold at the
same counter it is improbable that the purchase would be under the impression
that the Agarbathis are that of plaintiff. The person who purchase the
newspaper are literates and there will not be any scope of confusion. There is
no evidence that the consumer was mislead or misrepresentation was made. On
the other hand, the carton itself speaks the truth. The defendants neither
suppressed any information nor made any attempts to confuse the public. More
over, the mark of plaintiff and the mark on the Agarbathis carton are quite
dissimilar. The reputation and goodwill earned was only for the newspaper and
it cannot be linked to the unrelated goods. Thus, I find neither the deceptive
similarity nor likelihood of confusion is established. The trademark of both
the plaintiff and defendant are dissimilar and there is no iota of evidence
that the plaintiff suffered loss of goodwill or reputation apart from
financial loss. Further, the plaintiff has not established that the defendant
has been playing fraud on the other hand the relief of plaintiff is liable to
be rejected on the question of acquiescence and laches. Admittedly, a notice
was issued in 1994 calling upon the defendant to desist from using mark Eenadu
and according to the plaintiff the defendant stopped marketing the Agarbathis
after receipt of notice. But, there is no evidence on this aspect, on the
contrary the sales of defendant were increasing year by year as per the sales
particulars filed by him. The plaintiff knowingly kept quiet for nearly five
years before filing the suit. Further, the word Eenadu is a general word and
there is no evidence that the plaintiff became the exclusive user of the mark.
It is also not established that on account of use of mark on Agarbathis, the
plaintiff incurred substantial loss. Eenadu is not an inventor name and the
mark was designed only for use as masthead of the newspaper. The dictionary
meaning of Masthead as per Concise Oxford Dictionary 8th Edn., is title of a
newspaper etc., at the head of the front or editorial page. Thus, the very
name was conceived for the newspaper. At the most the name Eenadu could be a
household name of newspaper, but we are dealing with Agarbathis. Even though
it was in evidence that word Eenadu is being used by various other persons
including a Cooperative Bank, but that cannot be a ground to non-suit the
plaintiff. Thus, it is established that the plaintiff acquiesced his right to
restrain the defendant from using the mark Eenadu under Section 41(g) and (1)
of Specific Relief Act. It is not the case of plaintiff that the defendant has
been selling the Agarbathis surreptitiously without the knowledge of the
plaintiff. The ingredients required for successfully establishing the passing
off action are not established in this case by the plaintiff. The learned
trial Court was under mistaken impression that the plaintiff got to trademark
of Eenadu Telugu and English version for the goods falling in class 16 and 26.
It is the admitted case of plaintiff that it made application for registration
only awaiting registration. Thus, I find that the trial Court completely
misdirected itself on facts and law.

75\. For the foregoing reasons, I set aside the judgment and decree of the
lower Court in O.S. No. 555 of 1999, dated 24-7-2000 and allow the appeal
C.C.C.A. No. 178 of 2000 without costs and dismiss the suit with costs. In
view of this judgment, C.C.C.A. No. 180 of 2000 stands dismissed. No costs.

