

Supreme Court of India

Cosmic Dye Chemical vs Collector Of Central Excise, ... on 6 September, 1994

Equivalent citations: 1994 (48) ECC 55, 1995 (75) ELT 721 SC, (1995) 6 SCC
117, 1994 95 STC 604 SC

Bench: B J Reddy, S Sen, K Paripoornan

ORDER

1\. The appellant is engaged in the manufacturing of two kinds of dyes. One is
called the Rapidogens and the other Naphthol ASG. So far as Rapidogens is
concerned, it was held exempt from duty totally by virtue of Notification No.
180/61 dated November 23, 1961. Naphthol ASG was, of course, not exempt from
duty under the said notification. In the case of this product, the appellant
claimed the benefit of another exemption Notification being Notification No.
71/78 dated March 1, 1978. This notification provided that if the total
production of excisable goods in a factory does not exceed Rs. 13.75 lacs in
the preceding financial year, then clearances up to five lacs will be exempt
from duty. In his declaration filed for the purpose of claiming the benefit of
Notification No. 71/78, the appellant stated that the excisable goods
manufactured by him during the year 1977-78 (previous financial year) was Rs.
3,25,200 only. On the basis of the said declaration, benefit of Notification
No. 71/78 was extended to him.

2\. On November 19, 1981, the Assistant Collector issued a notice to the
appellant calling upon him to show cause as to why he should not be deprived
of the benefit of Notification No. 71/78 inasmuch as he had obtained the said
benefit on the basis of a false declaration to the effect that his production
of excisable goods was not in excess of Rs. 15 lacs. It was alleged that value
of Rapidogens and Naphthol ASG manufactured by the appellant was in excess of
Rs. 15 lacs. The appellant submitted his explanation wherein he submitted that
he was under the bona fide impression that inasmuch as Rapidogens was exempt
from duty by virtue of Notification No. 180/61, value of Rapidogens
manufactured by him need not be included in the declaration filed by him for
the purpose of Notification No. 71/78. This explanation was rejected and the
Assistant Collector revoked the benefit of the said notification and levied
the appropriate duty. It may be mentioned that the period for which the duty
was so levied is the period commencing from April 1, 1978 and ending with
October 23, 1978, i.e., for a period more than six months anterior to the
notice. This could be done only if the appellant's case fell within the
proviso to Section 11-A. Otherwise not.

3\. The Collector dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant. His further
appeal to the Tribunal also failed. The Tribunal, inter alia, adopted the
following reasoning while dismissing the appeal :

While misstatement or suppression of facts, per se, attract the larger period
of limitation, contravention of rules without the requisite intent does not.
Once this is so, it is obvious that, regardless of intent, a mere suppression
of facts or misstatement in the information statutorily required to be
supplied to the excise authorities attract the larger period of limitation.
The intent is immaterial in so far as fraud, misstatement or suppression of
facts are concerned.

(Emphasis added)

4\. In the facts and circumstances of the case, we cannot but hold that there
has been a misstatement, in so far as there has been a failure to include the
quantity of Rapidogens manufactured during the relevant period in the
statement furnished along with the classification list as well as the
declaration appended there to. The requirements of the notification in
question are unambiguous and there is no warrant or scope for bona fide
misconstruction.

5\. While it may be that the relevant information in regard to the manufacture
of Rapidogens had been, on other occasions, supplied and was in the possession
of excise authorities in answer to various queries and in the shape of gate
passes, when it came to making a statement for the purpose of availing of the
notification in question, the fact remains that the appellant had failed and
neglected to furnish the requisite information and thereby was guilty of a
mis-statement.

6\. In short, the Tribunal was of the opinion that so far as fraud,
suppression or misstatement of fact in the information statutorily required to
be supplied to the excise authorities is concerned, question of intent is
immaterial.

7\. The main limb of Section 11-A provides limitation of six months. In cases,
where the duty is not levied or paid or short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded, it can be recovered by the appropriate officer within
six months from the relevant date. (The expression "relevant date" is defined
in the section itself.) But the said period of six months gets extended to
five years where such non-levy, short levy, etc., is "by reason of fraud,
collusion or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts or contravention
of any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules with intent to evade
payment of duty....

8\. Now so far as fraud and collusion are concerned, it is evident that the
requisite intent, i.e., intent to evade duty is built into these very words.
So far as misstatement or suppression of facts are concerned, they are clearly
qualified by the word "wilful" preceding the words "misstatement or
suppression of facts" which means with intent to evade duty. The next set of
words "contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or rules" are again
qualified by the immediately following words "with intent to evade payment of
duty". It is, therefore, not correct to say that there can be a suppression or
misstatement of fact, which is not wilful and yet constitute a permissible
ground for the purpose of the proviso to Section 11-A. Misstatement or
suppression of fact must be wilful.

9\. Now coming to the facts of this case, the appellant's case is that he
thought bona fide that he need not include the value of the Rapidogens in his
declaration for the reason that the said product was fully exempt from duty
under Notification No. 180/61 dated November 23, 1961. Certain facts are
brought to our notice in support of this plea. It is also brought to our
notice that on the date of filing of his declaration, two High Courts had
taken the view that the goods exempted from duty are not includible within the
definition of "excisable goods" as defined in Clause (d) of Section 2. No
doubt, two other High Courts had taken a contrary view. The appellant's
factory is in the State of Maharashtra and the Bombay High Court had not taken
a view one way or the other. In all the circumstances, the appellant says, he
was under the bona fide impression that he need not mention the value of the
Rapidogens manufactured by him in his declarations.

10\. In the above circumstances and because the facts establish that the
misstatement of facts in the declaration filed by the appellant-or the
suppression of facts therein, as the case may be-cannot be called wilful, the
appeal is allowed. No order as to costs.

11\. Though certain other grounds were raised in the appeal memo, the learned
Counsel for the appellant has chosen not to press them and hence, need not be
dealt with.

