

Punjab-Haryana High Court

Patel Cotton Company Private Ltd. vs The State Of Punjab And Ors. on 14 May,
1964

Equivalent citations: 1964 15 STC 865 P H

Author: S Dulat

Bench: S Dulat, H Singh

ORDER S.S. Dulat, J.

1\. These two petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution involve the same
question of law. The controversy is not about the law which is applicable-not
even very much about the meaning of that law-but mostly about the manner of
its application in two cases. Each of the petitioners is a company registered
as a dealer under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948. They both deal in
cotton, purchase large quantities of unginned cotton, gin it and then dispose
of the proceeds consisting of ginned cotton and cotton-seeds. The Punjab
General Sales Tax Act imposes a purchase tax on goods specified in Schedule
'C' of the Act and that Schedule mentions cotton, both ginned and unginned,
and also oil-seeds which naturally include cotton-seeds. The Act provides-and
quite properly if I may say so-that in respect of goods subjected to the
purchase tax no sales tax will be levied. Further, the Act provides that if
goods subjected to the purchase tax are sold to a registered dealer within a
certain time or exported out of India or sold in the course of inter-State
trade then the purchase price of the goods sold will be excluded from the
taxable turnover or, to quote the words of the statute, the "taxable turnover"
of a dealer is arrived at "after deducting therefrom his turnover during that
period on-

the purchase of goods" which are sold not later than six months after the
close of the year, to a registered dealer, or in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce, or in the course of export out of the territory of India.

2\. Each of the petitioners claimed at the time of assessment (for the year
1960-61 in the case of Patel Cotton Company v. State of Punjab, and 1961-62 in
the other case R. Mohta v. The State of Punjab and Ors.) that out of the
unginned cotton which each had purchased and in respect of which each had
become liable to pay purchase tax, certain quantities of ginned cotton as well
as cotton-seeds obtained after ginning had been sold to registered dealers
within the prescribed period or sold in the course of inter-State trade or
exported out of India, and that the purchase price of those quantities of
ginned cotton and cotton-seeds should be deducted from the turnover. The
Assessing Authority did not accept that claim. In the case of Patel Cotton Co.
the Assessing Authority permitted a deduction of the sale price (as against
the purchase price) of the ginned cotton sold to registered dealers and also
the sale price of the ginned cotton exported out of India or sold in the
course of inter-State trade but wholly declined to make any allowance for
similar sales of cotton seeds. In the case of Mohta, the assessing Authority
deducted the purchase price of unginned cotton equal to the weight of the
ginned cotton sold to registered dealers but refused to take notice of the
sale of cotton seeds to registered dealers.

3\. The petitioners' main submission is that the sale of cotton-seeds was the
sale of the goods purchased by them in respect of which purchase tax was
payable and since the sales were made to registered dealers or in the course
of inter-State trade the taxable turnover should have been determined after
deducting the purchase price of the goods sold from the gross turnover. It is
common ground, apart from being common knowledge, that unginned cotton, as it
is sold in the market, contains in it not only pure cotton but also cotton-
seeds, and by weight the proportion approximately is one-third pure cotton and
two-thirds cotton-seeds. If, therefore, to take a convenient illustration, a
person buys three maunds of unginned cotton and then puts it through the
process of ginning, he has on his hands one maund of ginned cotton and two
maunds of cotton-seeds. The question is that if he proceeds to sell the entire
quantity of ginned cotton and cotton-seeds thus obtained, to a registered
dealer, has he or has he not sold the entire goods purchased by him in the
form of unginned cotton, to a registered dealer ? Viewed as a simple question
of fact, the answer in my opinion should be "yes", for he has in such a case
sold everything he had purchased and, of course, sold it to a registered
dealer. Learned counsel before us have, however, argued this matter as a
question of law. To appreciate the argument, it is convenient to first dispose
of two extreme positions adopted by the two sides. Mr. Kaushal for the
petitioners says that unginned and ginned cotton are both cotton in terms of
Schedule 'C' and purchase tax is of course payable on cotton. He, therefore,
contends that when the petitioners purchased unginned cotton, they became
liable to pay purchase tax, but when they sold the entire quantity of ginned
cotton taken out of the unginned cotton, they had sold the entire quantity of
cotton purchased by them and consequantly the entire purchase price of the
cotton (unginned) should be deducted from the gross turnover, irrespective of
what may have happened to the cotton-seeds. This argument, it will be noticed,
completely identifies unginned cotton with ginned cotton and takes no notice
of the reality that unginned cotton contains a large quantity of cotton-seeds.
The argument, therefore, is unreal, as it chooses to ignore the facts. Mr.
Doabia, on the other hand, urges that unginned cotton and ginned cotton are
two entirely different things and if, therefore, unginned cotton is purchased
and purchase tax paid on it and later on the cotton is ginned and the
resulting ginned cotton is sold, no part of the goods purchased has been sold,
for in such a case not a shred of unginned cotton is sold and consequently he
says that no deduction at all is permissible. He, therefore, maintains with
some courage that the Assessing Authority was wrong in allowing a deduction
even in respect of the sale of ginned cotton. This argument might have some
force if it were possible to agree that ginned cotton is entirely different
from unginned cotton and that the process of ginning brings into being an
entirely new commodity. This, however, is not so, for all that ginning does is
to separate pure cotton from cotton-seeds. Mr. Doabia says that ginning is a
manufacturing process and when unginned cotton is subjected to it resulting in
ginned cotton and cotton-seeds, it is very much like crushing oil-seeds to
manufacture oil. I find myself unable to agree, as there is no real
resemblance between crushing oil-seeds and ginning unginned cotton. Mr. Doabia
largely relies on the observations of the Andhra High Court in Kotak and
company v. State of Andhra Pradesh [1962] 13 S.T.C. 709. The learned Judges in
that case said-

* * * it is only by a manufacturing process that the cotton and the seed are separated, and it is not correct to say that the seed so separated is cotton itself, or part of the cotton. 

4\. This, however, had not been the view of this Court expressed quite clearly
in Raghbir Chand Som Chand v. Excise and Taxation Officer, Bhatinda, and Ors.
1960 P.L.R. 175. The learned Chief Justice emphatically said in that case-

I am, therefore, of the view that unginned and ginned cotton are essentially
the same thing, and buying unginned cotton and selling ginned cotton are two
transactions dealing with the same commodity.

5\. Tek Chand, J., agreeing with the learned Chief Justice, explained it thus-

It is well-understood, that manufacture implies a change, but every change is
not manufacture, in spite of the fact that every change in an article may be
the result of treatment, labour and manipulation. For purposes of manufacture
something more is necessary and there must be a transformation ; a new and
different article must emerge having a distinctive name, character or use.

6\. It is true, of course, that unginned and ginned cotton are in a sense
different, if only for the fact that there are no cotton seeds left in ginned
cotton, but it is hard to see how ginning unginned cotton creates anything
new, for all it does is to separate by mechanical means -and it could also be
done by hand-the two parts of unginned cotton. I am, therefore, unable to
agree that any manufacturing process is involved in ginning cotton or that the
process of ginning creates anything new or distinctive, and Mr. Doabia's
extreme contention, therefore, has to be rejected.

7\. The question then remains how such transactions should be viewed. As I
have said earlier, when a dealer buys unginned cotton he is in fact buying
pure cotton mixed with cotton seeds and is undoubtedly paying the price of
both. When, therefore, he separates the two by the process of ginning and then
proceeds to sell both the commodities, assuming that he sells the entire lot,
he does in fact sell the entire goods which he had purchased. The deduction
which has to be made under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act is of the turnover
on " the purchase of goods which are sold " and if the goods sold are the same
as purchased, then a full deduction has to be allowed. Mr. Doabia urges in
this connection that apart from ginned cotton, which may possibly be
considered the same thing as unginned cotton, the cotton-seeds obtained after
ginning cannot be confused with either ginned cotton or unginned cotton and,
therefore, the sale of cotton-seeds cannot entitle the dealer to deduct the
purchase price of the cotton-seeds from the gross turnover. This contention,
however, again ignores the fact that the cotton-seeds were in fact purchased
when unginned cotton was bought. It seems to me, therefore, that when a dealer
buys a certain quantity of unginned cotton and after ginning it he sells the
entire quantity of ginned cotton and cotton-seeds, he must be held to have
sold the entire un-ginned cotton which he had purchased and if the sale is to
a registered dealer, full deduction of the purchase price of unginned cotton
must be allowed. It follows that where only a part of the proceeds of ginning
has been so disposed of, that is, either sold to a registered dealer within
the specified time or exported out of India or sold in the course of inter-
State trade, a corresponding deduction must be permitted. That, in my opinion,
is the intention of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act. Mr. Doabia says in this
connection that it would be extremely difficult to find out the purchase price
of the ginned cotton which may have been sold after ginning or the purchase
price of the cotton-seeds obtained after ginning, although of course their
sale price is known, the difficulty being this that at the time of purchase
the cotton and the seeds are not separately bought. Actually, however, there
can be little difficulty in fixing the purchase price of either the cotton-
seeds or the ginned cotton, for the proportion in which they occur in unginned
cotton is known and the market price of the three commodities-unginned cotton,
ginned cotton and cotton-seeds-is also known. Nor can there be any difficulty
in finding out the cost of ginning. All that the Assessing Authority has to do
is to fix the purchase price of the ginned cotton or the cotton-seeds that
have actually been disposed of according to Section 5(2)(vi) of the Punjab
General Sales Tax Act and I can see no great difficulty in that connection, as
the Assessing Authority can certainly call and consider evidence bearing on
the matter.

8\. It is admitted that the assessment orders in these two cases are not in
accordance with the conclusion mentioned above. In one case the Assessing
Authority has deducted the sale price of ginned cotton instead of the purchase
price, while in both the cases the purchase price of cotton-seeds have been
unlawfully ignored and since the error in each case is apparent, these
assessments cannot stand. I would, therefore, allow these petitions with
costs, quash the assessments made and direct that a fresh assessment in each
case be made in accordance with the view expressed above.

Harbans Singh, J.

9\. I agree.

