

Supreme Court of India

Harbans Lal vs Jagmohan Saran on 10 October, 1985

Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 302, 1985 SCR Supl. (3) 634

Author: R Pathak

Bench: Pathak, R.S.

    
    
               PETITIONER:
    HARBANS LAL
    
    	Vs.
    
    RESPONDENT:
    JAGMOHAN SARAN
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT10/10/1985
    
    BENCH:
    PATHAK, R.S.
    BENCH:
    PATHAK, R.S.
    MISRA RANGNATH
    
    CITATION:
     1986 AIR  302		  1985 SCR  Supl. (3) 634
     1985 SCC  (4) 333	  1985 SCALE  (2)891
     CITATOR INFO :
     R	    1987 SC 117	 (19,20)
    
    
    ACT:
         Constitution of India, Article 226 - Writ of certiorari
    When can  be issued  - Power of High Court to reappraise the
    evidence - When arises.
         U.P. Urban	 Buildings (Regulation	of Letting, Rent and
    Eviction) Act,	1972, s.  12 (1)  (b) -	 Agent	carrying  on
    business in  the building on behalf of the original tenant -
    Tenant Whether deemed to have ceased to occupy the building.
    
    
    
    HEADNOTE:
         The respondent-landlord  filed a  petition under  8- 12
    read with  8- 16  of the U-P- Urban Buildings (Regulation of
    Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 against the appellant-
    tenant in  respect of  a shop  situated in  the district  Of
    Bulandshahr. He	 claimed a  declaration that  the  shop	 had
    fallen vacant  and that	 it should be released to him on the
    ground that the appellant-tenant had sub-let the shop to one
    Yadram and  had allowed	 it to be occupied by Yadram and his
    son  Madan  Lal,  neither  of  whom  was  a  member  of	 the
    appellant's family.  The prescribed  Authority dismissed the
    respondent's petition,	holding (i)  that the respondent had
    failed to  prove that the appellant had sub-let the shop and
    that it	 could be  deemed to  be vacant;  and (ii)  that the
    appellant  had	 established  that  he	was  conducting	 his
    business of  selling vegetables	 in the	 shop and that Madan
    Lal sat	 in on	his behalf.  An appeal by the respondent was
    also dismissed	by the	Second	Additional  District  Judge,
    Bulandshahr. However,  the High	 Court in  a  Writ  Petition
    filed by the respondent, remanded the case to the prescribed
    Authority for passing orders on the respondent's application
    for release  of the  property from  allotment on  the ground
    that the  appellant had	 been unable  to establish any legal
    relationship of	 agency between	 himself and  Madan  Lal  or
    Yadram and  therefore it must be taken that it was Madan Lal
    who was	 occupying the	shop within  the meaning  of  S.  12
    (l)(b) of the U.P. Act.
         Allowing the appeal to this Court,
    635
    ^
         HELD: 1.  It is well known that a writ in the nature of
    certiorari may	be issued  only if the order of the inferior
    tribunal or  subordinate court	suffers	 from  an  error  of
    jurisdiction or	 from a	 breach of the principles of natural
    justice or  is vitiated	 by a  manifest or apparent error of
    law. There  is	no  sanction  enabling	the  High  Court  to
    reappraise the evidence without sufficient reason in law and
    reach findings	of fact	 contrary to  those rendered  by  an
    inferior court	or subordinate	court.	When  a	 High  Court
    proceeds to  do so, it acts plainly in excess of its powers.
    [637 A-C]
         In the  instant case, the finding is that Madan Lal sat
    in the	shop conducting	 the vegetable	selling business  on
    behalf of  the appellant.  The	findings  of  fact  by	both
    authorities rested-on evidence, and there was no warrant for
    disturbing that	 finding of fact in a writ petition. [636 G-
    H]
         2. Under  s. 12(1)(b)  of the  U.P. Act  a tenant	of a
    building is  deemed to have ceased to occupy the building if
    he has	allowed it to be occupied by any person who is not a
    member of  his family.	The occupation of a person envisaged
    here cannot possibly include the occupation by any person as
    the agent  of the tenant. When a person sits in the premises
    and carries  on a business on behalf of and for the original
    occupant, it  cannot be	 said that the original occupant has
    thereby allowed	 the accommodation to be occupied within the
    meaning of s. 12 (l)(b). [638 B-F]
         Smt. Keshar  Bai v.  District Judge,  Mathura and Ors.,
    [1980]6 A.L.R. 165 referred to.
    
    
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2866 of 1979\.

From the Judgment and Order dated 1.8.1979 of the Allahabad High Court in
Civil Writ Petition No. 1942 of 1977\.

Shankar Ghosh and B.P. Maheshwari for the Appellant. G.L. Sanghi, Mr. Manoj
Swarup and Ms. Lalita Kohli for the Respondent.

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by PATHAK, J. : This appeal by special
leave is directed against the judgment of the Allahabad High Court allowing
the respondents writ petition on the finding that the accommodation let out to
the appellant must be deemed to be vacant.

636

The respondent is the landlord and the appellant is the tenant of a shop in
Mohalla Nan Panjan, Khurja in the district of Bulandshahr. The respondent
filed a petition under s. 12 read with s. 16 of the U.P. Urban Buildings
(Regulation of Letting Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 alleging that the
accommodation had been sub-let by the appellant to one Yadram, that the
appellant had ceased to occupy the shop and had allowed it to be occupied by
Yadram and his son Madan Lal, neither of whom was a member of the appellant's
family. He claimed a declaration that the shop had fallen vacant and that it
should be released to him.

The Prescribed Authority made an order dated October 30, 1976 rejecting the
respondent's petition, on the finding that he had failed to prove that the
appellant had sub-let the shop and that it could be deemed to be vacant. He
found that the appellant had established that he was conducting his business
of selling vegetables in the shop and that Madan Lal sat in on his behalf. An
appeal by the respondent was dismissed by the learned Second Additional
District Judge, Bulandshahr by his order dated September 21, 1977. He affirmed
the findings of the Prescribed Authority.

The respondent filed a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court, and on
August 1, 1979 a learned Single Judge of the High Court held that the
appellant had been unable to establish any legal relationship of agency
between himself and Madan Lal or Yadram and therefore it must be taken that it
was Madan Lal who occupying the shop within the meaning of s. 12 (l)(b) of the
aforesaid U.P. Act. The High Court also declined to accept the appellant's
case that the appellant was carrying on the business of selling vegetables
when he was already carrying on a brick kiln business and had a cold storage.
Holding that the property must be deemed to be vacant it remanded the case to
be Prescribed Authority for passing orders on the respondent's application for
release of the property from allotment.

We are satisfied that the High Court travelled outside its jurisdiction in
embarking upon a reappraisal of the evidence. The Prescribed Authority as well
as the learned Second Additional District Judge concurrently found that Madan
Lal was sitting in the shop on behalf of the appellant and deputising for him
in carrying on the vegetable selling business. The findings by both
authorities rested on evidence, and there was no warrant for disturbing that
finding of fact in a writ petition. The limitations on the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 637 226 of the Constitution are well settled. The
writ petition before the High Court prayed for a writ in the nature of
certiorari, and it is well known that a writ in the nature of certiorari may
be issued only if the order of the inferior tribunal or subordinate court
suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the principles of
natural Justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. There
is no sanction enabling the High Court to reappraise the evidence without
sufficient reason in law and reach findings of fact contrary to those rendered
by an inferior court or subordinate court. When a High Court proceeds to do
so, it acts plainly in excess of its powers. We are informed that a report of
the Commissioner in another suit was not considered by the Prescribed
Authority and by the learned Second Additional District Judge, and therefore,
it is urged, the High Court was justified in taking that report into
consideration and entering into an examination of the material on the record.
We have examined the report of the Commissioner and we find that an objection
had been filed to that report and the trial Court had failed to dispose it of.
In other words, the report of the Commissioner is not a final document and
cannot be taken into consideration as it stands. It must, therefore, be
ignored. That being so, the finding of fact rendered by the Prescribed
Authority and affirmed by the learned Second Additional District Judge remains
undisturbed. The finding is that Madan Lal sat in the shop conducting the
vegetable selling business on behalf of the appellant.

The next point to consider is whether the shop can be deemed to be vacant
within the meaning of s. 12 (l)(b) of the U.P. Act. Section 12 provides :-

> "12. Deemed vacancy of building in certain cases -

> (l) A landlord or tenant of a building shall be deemed to have ceased to
> occupy the building or a part thereof if -

> (a) he has substantially removed his effects there from, or

> (b) he has allowed it to be occupied by any person who is not a member of
> his family, or

> (c) in the case of a residential building, he as well as members of his
> family have taken up residence, not being temporary residence, elsewhere.

x x x x x x x x x" 638

The deemed vacancy of a building is relevant for the regulation of letting
such a building. A building which falls vacant is available for allotment
under s.16 of the Act to a tenant. Under s. 12 (1)(b), with which we are
concerned here, a tenant of a building is deemed to have ceased to occupy the
building if he has allowed it to be occupied by any person who is not a member
of his family. The occupation of a person envisaged here cannot possibly
include the occupation by any person as the agent of the tenant. If the
contrary construction is accepted, and it is held that a person who is a mere
agent or servant of the original occupant falls within the contemplation of
s. 12(1)(b), it would be impossible for the original occupant to engage any
person to assist him in the discharge of his responsibilities in the place
where he does so. It cannot be conceived that the U.P. Legislature intended a
person, occupying a building as a tenant, to live or operate in such a
building with members of his family and no one else. In the present case,
Madan Lal sat in the shop conducting the vegetable business on behalf of the
appellant. When he did so, it must be considered as an occupation by the
appellant. Our attention has been drawn to Smt. Keshar Bal v. District Judge,
Mathura and Ors., [1980] 6 A.L.R. 165, where a Full Bench of the Allahabad
High Court held that a "deemed vacancy" would arise within the meaning of s.
12 (1)(b) where a person other than a family member was found in the
occupation of a building. It does not appear that the learned Judges
specifically considered the full significance and scope of the expression
"occupied" in s. 12(1)(b). We are of opinion that when a person sits in the
premises and carries on a business on behalf of and for the original occupant,
it cannot be said that the original occupant has thereby allowed the
accommodation to be occupied within the meaning of s. 12(1)(b).

In our judgment, the High Court is wrong in holding that the case attracts the
provisions of s. 12(1)(b) of the U.P. Act.

Upon the aforesaid considerations, we set aside the judgment and order of the
High Court and restore that of the Prescribed Authority and the learned Second
Additional District Judge. The appeal is allowed with costs.

    
    
    M.L.A.					     Appeal allowed.
    639
    
    
    
    

