

Calcutta High Court

Tarulata Shyam And Ors. vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax on 19 February, 1971

Equivalent citations: 1971 82 ITR 485 Cal

Author: K Roy

Bench: S P Mitra, K Roy

JUDGMENT K.L. Roy, J.

1\. The assessee and the original applicant in this reference was one P. C.
Shyam who died during the pendency of the reference and his heirs and legal
representatives have been substituted in his place as the applicants.

2\. The assessee was substantial shareholder and managing director of Duiaguri
Tea Co. (P.) Ltd. Admittedly, the company is one in which the public are not
substantially interested within the meaning of Section 23A of the Indian
Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as " the Act"). The reference
concerns the assessment year 1957-58, the corresponding previous year being
the calender year 1956. At the commencement of that year there was a credit
balance of Rs. 65,246 in the assessee's account in the books of the said
company brought forward from the earlier year. Between the 11th January and
the 12th November the cash withdrawals by the assessee from the company
amounted to Rs. 4,97,442. Deducting therefrom the opening credit balance of
Rs. 65,246 and outstanding dividends of Rs. 1,40,000 declared on the 31st
December, 1955, in favour of the assessee's major sons transferred to his
account and a further dividend of Rs. 19,493 credited to the assessee's
account from Kathoni Tea Estate, the total loan or advance taken by the
assessee from the company as on the 12th November, 1956, came to Rs. 2,72,703.
On the 29th December, 1956, the assessee repaid the company a total sum of Rs.
1,93,000 and on the 31st December, 1956, the last day of the previous year,
the assessee's account was credited with another sum of Rs. 80,000 in respect
of the dividend due to him and his wife and a further sum of Rs. 29,326 was
credited for hypothecation. Thus, before the previous year ended, the
assessee's account was credited with an aggregate sum of Rs. 2,99,326 which
exceeded the debit balance of Rs. 2,72,703 as on the 12th November, 1956. In
effect, the position was that there was no advance or loan due by the assessee
to the company at the end of the relevant previous year.

3\. The Income-tax Officer found that the accumulated profits of the company
as on the 1st January, 1956, amounted to Rs. 6,83,005 and he accordingly
treated the sum of Rs. 2,72,703 as dividend under Section 2(6A)(e) of the Act
and grossed up that amount under Section 16(2) and gave credit for tax in
accordance with the latter section.

4\. The assessee's appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was
unsuccessful and the assessment of this amount as dividend was confirmed.

5\. On further appeal by the assessee to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal,
there was a difference of opinion between the Accountant Member and the
Judicial Member. The Accountant Member took the view that the moment a payment
was made as envisaged in Section 2(6A)(e) it became clothed with the character
of dividend and no subsequent action of the parties could take it out of
mischief of that section. There was no provision in the Act that if any such
payment was returned by the shareholder to the company either within the same
accounting year or subsequently, it would cease to be governed by the
provisions of that section. He was, therefore, of the opinion that the sum of
Rs. 2,72,703 was taxable as dividend under Section 2(6A)(e).

6\. The Judicial Member, on the other hand, held that the total income of the
assessee during the relevant previous year could be computed and assessed only
at the end of that previous year. It could not be computed at interim periods
during that previous year. If it was found that although the shareholder had
taken a loan from the company during the course of a previous year but had
returned the same to the company before the close of that previous year, it
could only be said while computing the shareholder's total income at the end
of that previous year that no advance or loans from the company of which he
was a shareholder stood for his benefit at the time relevant for computation
of his total income. Accordingly, he held that the sum of Rs. 2,72,703 was not
a dividend within the meaning of Section 2(6A)(e) of the Act :

7\. On such difference of opinion the following question was referred to the
President of the Tribunal under Section 5A(7) of the Act;

"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of Rs.
2,72,703 is to be treated as dividend income in the hands of the assessee
within the meaning of Section 2(6A)(e) ?"

8\. The reference was heard by the President himself, who, on a review of the
case law, and particularly the decision of the Supreme Court in Javeri's case,
held that an advance of loan received by a shareholder of a private company
forthwith assumed the character of a dividend and became his income by virtue
of the fiction created by Section 5(6A)(e) and it ceased to be a liability for
the purpose of taxation, although the assessee might, in fact or in law,
remain liable to the company for its repayment. If the assessee repaid the
loan subsequently, such payment would not liquidate or reduce the quantum of
the income which had already accrued as such repayment would not be allowed as
a permissible deduction under Section 12(2). Agreeing, therefore, with the
view taken by the Accountant Member he answered the question referred In the
affirmative.

9\. In view of the majority decision the Tribunal dismissed the assessee's
appeal, but at his instance referred the following question of law for the
opinion of this court :

"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of Rs.
2,72,703 net (Rs. 3,19,245 gross) is to be treated as dividend income in the
hands of the assessee within the meaning of Section 2(6A)(e) of the Indian
Income-tax Act, 1922?"

10\. Before dealing with the contentions raised in this reference it would be
convenient to set out the relevant provisions of the Act as applicable to the
assessment year concerned in this reference. Section 3 charges to tax the
total income of an individual, a Hindu undivided family, a firm or other
association of persons or of a company. Section 4(1) provides that the total
income of any previous year is the aggregate of all income, profits and gains
accruing of arising to or received by an assessee during that year. Section
2(6A) gives an inclusive definition of dividend. Clauses (a) to (d) deal with
the distribution by a company, inter alia of its accumulated profits. Clause
(e) provides that dividend includes any payment by a company, not being a
company in which the public are substantially interested within the meaning of
Section 23A, of any sum (whether as representing a part of the assets of the
company or otherwise) by way of advance or loan to a shareholder or any
payment by any such company on behalf of or for the individual benefit of a
shareholder, to the extent to which the company in either case, possesses
accumulated profits ; but dividend does not include-

(i) .....

(ii) any advance or loan made to a shareholder by a company in the ordinary
course of its business where the lending of money is a substantial part of the
business of the company ;

(iii) any dividend paid by a company which is set off by the company against
the whole or any part of any sum previously paid by it and treated as a
dividend within the meaning of Clause (e) to the extent to which it is so set
off.

11\. Section 12(1) provides that the tax shall be payable by an assessee under
the head "Income from other sources" in respect of income, profits and gains
of every kind which may be included in his total income (if not included under
any of the proceeding heads).

12\. Section 12(1B) provides that any payment by a company to a shareholder by
way of advance or loan which would have been treated as a dividend within the
meaning of Section 2(6A)(e) in any previous year relevant to any assessment
year prior to the assessment year ending on the 31st day of March, 1956, had
that clause been in force in that year shall be treated as a dividend received
by him in the previous year relevant to the assessment year ending on the 31st
day of March, 1956, if such loan or advance remained outstanding on the first
day of such previous year. It is to be observed that the provisions of both
Sections 2(6A)(e) and 12(1B) were introduced in the Act by the Finance Act,
1955, with effect from the 1st April, 1955. In the relevant assessment year
Sections 16(2) of the Act was operative and provided as follows :

13\. ''For the purposes of inclusion in the total income of an assessee any
dividend shall be deemed to be income of the previous year in which it is
paid, credited or distributed or deemed to have been paid, credited or
distributed to him and shall be increased to such amounts as would, if income-
tax... at the rate applicable to the total income of the company .... for the
financial year in which the dividend is paid, credited or distributed or
deemed to have been paid, credited, or distributed, were deducted therefrom,
be equal to the amount of the dividend." This sub-section was repealed by the
Finance Act, 1959, which also introduced Section 12 (1A) in the Act under
which profit from other sources shall include dividend and any dividend
declared by a company or distributed or paid by it within the meaning of
Clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of Section 2(6A) shall be deemed to be the
income of the previous year in which it is so declared, distributed or paid,
as the case may be. There could be no dispute that the assessment in the
present reference is governed by the provisions of Section 16(2) and not
Section 12(1A). Mr. Choudhury, learned counsel for the applicant, raised the
following main contentions in support of the reference, viz., (i) that the
amount of Rs. 2,72,703 was not taxable as dividend as admittedly there was no
outstanding advance or loan due by the assessee to the company at the end of
the relevant previous year. Under the law, on repayment, the loan is wiped out
and at the end of the accounting year there was no loan or advance outstanding
from the company to the assessee and, therefore, there could be no question of
the application of Section 2(6A) (e) ; that even if be held that the amount
was taxable as dividend then deduction should be allowed of the amount of
repayment under Section 12(2).

14\. Mr. Choudhury contended that the assessee's method of accounting was
mercantile. The Income-tax Officer was not entitled to look only on the debit
side of the accounts and ignore the credit side. It was only the balance at
the end of the accounting year that should have been considered for the
purpose of Section 2(6A)(e). Mr. Choudhury further considered that if it was
the intention of the legislature to rope in even loans repaid before the close
of the relevant accounting year to be taxed as dividend under Section 2(6A)(e)
it has failed to express such intention in clear and unambiguous language.
According to the canons of construction of taxing statutes taxing provisions
should be interpreted in accordance with the plain meaning of the language
used and in case of ambiguity or doubt the construction should be in favour of
the taxpayer. Such a provision should not be interpreted on the presumed
intention of the legislature. Though Mr. Choudhury cited various authorities
including passages from both Craies and Maxwell on the Interpretation of
Statutes and also several decisions of the Supreme Court, in view of the fact
that this particular provision has been interpreted by the Supreme Court in
Navnit Lal C. Javeri v. K. K. Sen, it is not necessary to refer to these
authorities. For the proposition that in any event the amount of the loan
repaid should have been allowed as a deduction under Section 12(2), Mr.
Choudhury cited the authority of the Supreme Court in Eastern Investments Ltd.
v. Commissioner of Income-tax, . But in that case what was allowed as
deduction was the interest paid on a debenture loan taken for the purpose of
maintaining the assessee's dividend income and the case is not an authority
for the proposition that even the repayment of the principal amount of a loan
is allowable under Section 12(2).

15\. As in our opinion the answer to the question referred is more or less
concluded by the decision of the Supreme Court in Navnit Lal C. Javeri v. K.K.
Sen, it is not necessary to refer to the argument of Mr. Pal for the
department or to discuss the other authorities cited by learned counsel in
this case. The validity of Section 2(6A)(e) and Section 12(1B) was challenged
before the Bombay High Court in a writ petition. The High Court rejected the
application and an appeal was preferred to the Supreme Court. After setting
out the provisions of Section 2(6A)(e) and Section 12(1B) the court observed
as follows at page 202 of the report:

"It is thus clear that the combined effect of these two provisions is that
three kinds of payments made to the shareholder of a company to which the said
provisions apply, are treated as taxable dividend to the extent of the
accumulated profits held by the company. These three kinds of payments are:
(1) payments made to the shareholder by way of advance or loan ; (2) payments
made on his behalf; and (3) payments made for his individual benefit. There
are five conditions which must be satisfied before Section 12(1B) can be
invoked against a shareholder. The first condition is that the company in
question must be one in which the public are not substantially interested
within the meaning of Section 23A as it stood in the year in which the loan
was advanced. The second condition is that the borrower must be a shareholder
at the date when the loan was advanced; it is immaterial what the extent of
his shareholding is. The third condition is that the loan advanced to a
shareholder by such a company can be deemed to be dividend only to the extent
to which it is shown that the company possessed accumulated profit at the date
of the loan. This is an important limit prescribed by the relevant section.
The fourth condition is that the loan must not have been advanced by the
company in the ordinary course of its business. In other words, this provision
would not apply to cases where the company which advances a loan to its
shareholder carries on the business of money-lending itself ; and the last
condition is that the loan must have remained outstanding at the commencement
of the shareholder's previous year in relation to the assessment year
1955-56."

16\. The last condition is not germane to the present case. In the same case
it was further observed at page 204 that in considering the question as to
whether a particular item in the hands of a citizen could be regarded as his
income or not, it would be inappropriate to apply the tests traditionally
prescribed by the Income-tax Act as such. This seems to answer Mr. Choudhury's
contention that a loan cannot be treated as an item of income. The Surpreme
Court further observed at page 207 :

"The companies to which the impugned section applies are companies in which at
least 75 per cent. of the voting power lies in the hands of persons other than
the public, and that means that the companies are controlled by a group of
persons allied together and having the same interest. In the case of such
companies, the controlling group can do what it likes with the management of
the company, its affairs and its profits within the limits of the Companies
Act, It is for this group to determine whether the profits made by the company
should be distributed as dividends or not. The declaration of dividend is
entirely within the discretion of this group. When the legislature realised
that though money was reasonably available with the company in the form of
profits, those in charge of the company deliberately refused to distribute it
as dividends to the shareholders, but adopted the device of advancing the said
accumulated profits by way of loan or advance to one of its shareholders, it
was plain that the object of such a loan or advance was to evade the payment
of tax on accumulated profits under Section 23A. It will be remembered that an
advance or loan which falls within the mischief of the impugned section is
advance or loan made by a company which does not normally deal in money-
lending, and it is made with the full knowledge of the provisions contained in
the impugned section. The object of keeping accumulated profits without
distributing them obviously is to take the benefit of the lower rate of super-
tax prescribed for companies. This object was defeated by Section 23A which
provides that in the case of undistributed profits, tax would be levied on the
shareholders on the basis that the accumulated profits will be deemed to have
been distributed amongst them. Similarly, Section 12(1B) provides that if a
controlled company adopts the device of making a loan or advance to one of its
shareholders, such shareholders will be deemed to have received the said
amount out of the accumulated profits and would be liable to pay tax on the
basis that he has received the said loan by way of dividend. It is clear that
when such a device is adopted by a controlled company, the controlling group
consisting of shareholders have deliberately decided to adopt the device of
making a loan or advance. Such an arrangement is intended to evade the
application of Section 23A. The loan may carry interest and the said interest
may be received by the company ; but the main object underlying the loan is to
avoid payment of tax. It may ultimately be repaid to the company and when it
is so repaid, it may or may not be treated as part of accumulated profits. 11
Is this kind of a well-planned device which Section 12(1B) intends to reach
for the purpose of taxation."

17\. It is clear from the above cited passage that if a controlled company
adopted a device of making a loan or advance to one of its shareholders such a
shareholder would be deemed to have received the said amount out of the
accumulated profits and would be liable to pay tax on the basis that he had
received the said loan by way of dividend. Whether the loan is ultimately
repaid to the company or not is immaterial. This decision would seem to answer
all the contentions raised by Mr. Choudhury against the assessment of the
amount as dividend. Further, as pointed out by both the Accountant Member and
the President of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, neither the Bombay High
Court nor the Madras High Court, who had also an occasion to consider this
question, had any doubts that the liability to tax attached as soon as the
loan was taken from the company. For instance, in the Madras case of K.M.S.
Lakshmana Aiyar v. Additional Income-tax Officer, [1960] 40 I.T.R. 469 (Mad.)
it was observed that under Section 2(6A)(e) a loan or advance by a controlled
company to its shareholder would attract tax liability though such a loan
might be repaid subsequently even during that year. Again, the Bombay High
Court in Navnit Lal C. Javeri v. K.K. Sen, from which the aforesaid appeal was
taken to the Supreme Court, has observed as follows : "The tax is attracted at
the point of time when the said loan is borrowed by the members." We have,
therefore, no hesitation in holding that the liability to be taxed attaches to
any amount taken as a loan by a shareholder from the company at the moment the
loan is borrowed and it is immaterial whether the loan is repaid before the
end of the accounting year or not. The answer to the question referred must,
therefore, be in the affirmative and in favour of the department. The
applicants are to pay the costs of this application.

Sankar Prasad Mitra, J.

18\. I agree.

