

Karnataka High Court

Dr Dhananjay Reddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 9 January, 2017

Author: L.Narayana Swamy

    
    
                                    1
    
    
    
    
     IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
    
            DATED THIS THE 9TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2017
    
                            BEFORE
    
           THE HON'BLE Mr. JUSTICE L.NARAYANA SWAMY
    
               WRIT PETITION NO.65700/2016 (APMC)
    
    BETWEEN:
    
    DR. DHANANJAY REDDY
    AGED ABOUT 47 YEARS
    S/O LATE SEETHA REDDY
    RESIDING AT BAYYAPPANAHALLY
    DIBBURAHALLI POST, SADLI HOBLI
    SHIDLAGHATTA TALUK
    CHICKKABALLAPUR DISTRICT - 562 105
                                               ... PETITIONER
    
    (BY SRI. PADMANABH MAHALE, SENIOR COUNSEL FOR
        SRI. H.SUNIL KUMAR, ADVOCATE)
    
    AND:
    
    1.     THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
           DEPARTMENT OF APMC
           VIDHANA SOUDHA
           BANGALORE - 560 001
           REPRESENTED BY ITS
           PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
    
    2.     THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
           DEPARTMENT OF COOPERATION
           M.S.BUILDING
           BANGALORE - 560 001
           REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY
    
    3.     THE DIRECTOR
           AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
                                         2
    
    
    
         MARKETING COMMITTEE
         NO.16, 11TH RAJ BHAVAN ROAD
         P.B.NO.5309
         BANGALORE - 560 001
    
    4.   THE DEPUTY COMMISSIONER
         CHICKKABALLAPUR DISTRICT - 562 101
                                                          ... RESPONDENTS
    
    (BY SRI.A.G. SHIVANNA, ADDL. A.G. FOR
        SMT. KAVITHA H.C., HCGP FOR R1, 2 & 4;
        SRI. MALLIKARJUNA C BASAREDDY, ADVOCATE FOR R3)
    
          THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 AND
    227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO QUASH THE
    NOTIFICATION DATED 16.12.2016 ISSUED BY R-4 AT ANNEXURE -
    F AS THE SAME IS NOT SUSTAINABLE IN LAW AND ETC.,
    
        THIS PETITION COMING ON FOR ORDERS, THIS DAY, THE
    COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:
    
                             ORDER
    

Heard the learned counsel on both sides and perused the records.

2\. This writ petition is filed to quash the notification dated 16.12.2016
issued by respondent No.4 vide Annexure-F as the same is not sustainable in
law.

3\. Respondent No.4 - The Deputy Commissioner, Chickkaballapur issued a
notification on 08.11.2016 for holding elections to the A.P.M.C. As per the
notification,  3 calendar of events have been issued. Notwithstanding the
same, 2nd notification was issued on 16.12.2016 and the same was challenged
before this Court in writ petition. The 2nd notification was quashed in writ
petition Nos.63515/2016 and it was confined only insofar as Shidlagatta Taluk
and the Deputy Commissioner, Chikkaballapura district was directed to complete
the election process from the stage where it was stopped.

4\. Learned Senior counsel submits that the petitioner has prayed to permit
him to file nomination but the same was denied. Hence, he has filed this writ
petition quash Annexure-F dated 16.12.2016 and to direct the respondent to
accept the nomination to contest the election which is scheduled to
12.01.2017.

5\. Learned Additional Advocate General and also learned counsel for
respondent No.3 prayed to dismiss the petition and submits that the petitioner
cannot challenge Annexure-F since he has no grievance and he has not filed  4
any nomination either pursuant to the 1st or the 2nd notification. Annexure-F
was issued in respect of the other constituency other than Shidlagatta which
was permitted in the nature of direction in the earlier petition.

6\. Annexure-F notification relates to conduct of election of Chickballapur,
Gowribidanur, Bagepalli and Chintamani Agricultural produce marketing
committees. In the earlier order the Deputy Commissioner was directed to
continue the election process from the stage where it was stopped. Petitioner
is now seeking to permit him to file nomination. That stage having already
passed through, not a case for interference.

Hence writ petition is rejected.

Sd/-

JUDGE BS

