

Uttaranchal High Court

Prakash Kumar Jha vs State Of Uttarakhand on 1 May, 2018

    
    
    BA2 No.136 of 2017
    
    Hon'ble V.K. Bist, J.
    

Mrs. Pushpa Joshi, Senior Advocate assisted by Ms. Chetna Latwal, Advocate for
the applicant.

Mr. Pankaj Joshi, Brief Holder for the State of Uttarakhand.

Mr. M.K. Ray, Advocate for the complainant.

Heard learned counsel for the parties. The applicant has moved this second
bail application seeking bail in connection with F.I.R. No.95 of 2015, Under
Section 307 and 120-B of I.P.C., P.S. Transit Camp (Rudrapur), District Udham
Singh Nagar.

Though time was granted thrice to the State counsel for getting instructions
in this regard but State counsel is unable to enquire about the criminal
history of the applicant.

Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant submits that applicant has falsely
been implicated in the instant case. She submits that applicant has no
criminal history. She submits that the Coordinate Bench of this Court granted
bail to the co-accused Anal Sarkar vide order dated 17.11.2015. She submits
that the there is delay of 6 days in lodging the FIR though distance of
concerning police station is only 1 km. from the alleged spot. She submits
that the applicant is not named in the FIR. She submits that the applicant is
in jail since 20.08.2015; he is ready to furnish adequate sureties as per the
satisfaction of the court concerned. She further submits that after rejection
of first bail application, the statement of victim has been recorded by the
Court.

Learned counsel for the complainant as well as State counsel vehemently
opposed the bail application. Learned counsel for the complainant submitted
that the complainant was badly injured and got serious injuries, which is
clear from the statement of the doctor. He submits that in case applicant is
granted bail, he may harm the complainant physically.

Having considered the submission of learned counsel for the parties and
without expressing any opinion as to final merits of the case, this Court is
of the view that applicant deserves bail.

Accordingly, the second bail application is allowed. Let the applicant Prakash
Kumar Jha be released on bail on his executing personal bond and furnishing
two local and reliable sureties of `1,00,000/-, each of the like amount to the
satisfaction of the Magistrate concerned.

However, it is provided that in case it is found that applicant is misusing
the bail, liberty is granted to the prosecution as well as to the State to
file bail cancellation application.

(V.K. Bist, J.) 01.05.2018 Arti

