

Delhi High Court

M/S. Hindustan Pencils Pvt. Ltd. vs M/S. India Stationery Products ... on 23
January, 1989

Bench: B Kirpal

ORDER

1\. The plaintiffs have filed a suit for perpetual injunction alleging
infringement of their registered trade mark and have also prayed for a decree
for rendition of accounts of profits against the defendants. Along with this
suit, an application under 0.39 Rr. 1 and 2 has also been filed for an interim
injunction against the defendants, for restraining them from infringing the
said mark.

2\. Facts, relevant for the disposal of the application for injunction, may
first be noticed. It is alleged by the plaintiffs that they are the
proprietors of the following two registered trade marks:

"(a) Trade mark Nataraj with the device of Nataraj under No. 260466 dt.
6-11-1969 claiming user since 22-2-1961 in respect of pencils, refills for
propelling pens and pencils, pen sharpen, pens, fountain pens, erasers, pin
clips and staples included in class 16.

(b) Device of Nataraj under No. 283730 dt. 27-10-1972 in respect of pencils
all kinds, erasers, refills for propelling pens and pencils, pencil
sharpeners, pens, fountain pens, pins, clips, wire staples for stapling
presses and pins."

According to the plaintiffs, the aforesaid marks were adopted by them in the
year 1961and after registration the same are still valid a subsisting in the
register of Trade Marks. it is the case of the plaintiffs that they are
incurring large expense of thousands of rupees by way of advertisement and the
sale of their 11, 12 products under the trade mark of Nataraj is over eight
crores. The plaintiffs have also placed on record copy of the certificate of
their registered trademark along with their registered label. Some of the
labels and cartons bearing the said mark and device are printed in red-color.
One such label contains the name Nataraj and also has the photograph of the
dancing Nataraj, which is the device, which has been registered.

3\. According to the plaintiffs, in the middle of the year 1985 they got to
know that the defendants had surreptitiously got registered a copyright, with
the Office of the Registrar of Copyright, a label similar to that of the
plaintiffs in respect of pins. The defendants got this copyright in respect of
pins under the name of Nataraj and a copy of the carton, which has been filed
in Court, shows that the defendants have not only used the registered name of
the plaintiffs, namely, Nataraj but have also used the device of the dancing
Nataraj which is identical to the dancing figure which has been registered by
the plaintiffs with the Registrar of Trade Marks.

4\. It is alleged by the plaintiffs that the conduct of the defendants is
fraudulent inasmuch as they are using the trademark and the device of Nataraj
in respect of stationery pins even though the plaintiffs are the registered
owners of the said trademark and device. This alleged, deliberate and
dishonest act on the part of the defendants is stated to be causing a damage
to the plaintiff s name, goodwill and business. According to the plaintiffs,
pecuniary compensation will not afford them as adequate relief and if
injunction is not granted, the plaintiffs will suffer irreparable loss and
injury to the business, name, reputation and goodwill.

5\. It is further contended that after the plaintiffs got to know about the
wrongful registration bf the copyright by the defendants, they applied in
June, 1985 with the Registrar of Copyright for rectification and cancellation
of the defendants' registration. The proceedings so initiated are still stated
to be pending before the Registrar of Copyright.

6\. On the basis of the allegations contained in the plaint and the
application, supported by the documents placed on record, an ad interim
exporter injunction was granted, inter alia, restraining the defendants from
manufacturing or selling pins and clips in the carton bearing the trade mark
and device Nataraj of which trade mark and device the plaintiffs were the
registered owners.

7\. The defendants filed their written statement and reply to the application.
It is not necessary to refer to the averments made in the written statement
and the reply, with regard to the merits of the case, in any great detail
because the main objection which has been raised therein, and which is the
only contention which has been argued before me at length by the learned
counsel for the defendants, is that there has been an inordinate delay on the
part of the plaintiffs, in filing the present suit. It is contended by the
defendants that the plaintiffs were aware of the use of the trade mark Nataraj
by the defendants since the year 1982, when the advertisements of the
plaintiffs and the defendants appeared in the Magazine under the name 'Paper &
Stationery Samachar' of March, 1982. It is contended that there has been delay
of more than six years in filing the present suit. It is also alleged that the
plaintiffs, have not used the trade mark Nataraj for paper pins and clips on a
commercial scale prior to the defendants. The defendants have alleged, in
their reply to the application under 0. 39 Rr 1 and 2, that the sale of their
goods between the year 1980-81 and 1987-88 ranged between Rs. 6,96,799.90 and
Rs. 11,39,978.62 per year.

8\. The plaintiffs filed their rejoinder to the reply filed to the application
under 0. 39 Rr 1 and 2. According to the plaintiffs, they became aware of the
use of the trade mark Nataraj by the defendants only in June, 1985. It is also
the case of the plaintiffs that they 1 have sales of pins and clips under the
trade mark Nataraj. It is further alleged that as the plaintiffs are the
registered proprietors, they have the exclusive right to use the trade mark
Nataraj and that it is not necessary for them to have huge sales in order to
get protection.

9\. The main question which really arises for consideration before me is
whether the plaintiffs are not entitled to the grant of an interim injunction
because of inordinate delay or laces or acquiescence, as alleged by the
defendants. The defendants have not sought to contend before me that the use
of the mark does not infringe the plaintiffs registered trade mark. In other
words, the argument proceeded on the basis that the mark used by the
defendants was similar to the registered trade mark of the plaintiffs. Shri
Anand fairly conceded that if the defendants' defense of the plaintiffs being
guilty of inordinate delay or acquiescence is not accepted then, in that case,
interim injunction may have to be issued because there is, admittedly, an
infringement by the defendants of the plaintiffs' registered trade mark.

10\. Under S. 28(l) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, the
registered proprietor of a trade mark gets the exclusive right to use the said
mark in relation to the goods in respect of which the trade mark is registered
and the said owner also gets a right to obtain relief in respect of
infringement of the trade mark in the manner provided by the Act. Section 29
of the Act, inter alia, provides that a registered trade mark is infringed by
a person who, not being the registered proprietor of the trade mark or a
registered user thereof, either uses or permits the use of the trade mark
which is identical with or deceptively similar to the registered trade mark in
relation to any goods. Sub-sec. (2) of S. 29 relates to marks which are
registered in part B of the Register and it is not necessary to refer to the
said provision because in the present case it is an admitted case of the
parties that the marks of the plaintiffs have been registered in Part A of the
Register. It may, however, be noted that u/s. 29(2) an injunction in respect
of a trade mark registered in part B of the Register will not be granted if
the defendant establishes that the use of the mark, of which the plaintiff
complains, is not likely to deceive or cause confusion or to indicate a
connection in the course of trade between the goods in respect of which the
trade mark is registered and some person having the right, either as a
registered proprietor or as a registered user, to use the trade mark. Section
106 of the said Act specifically provides for the Court being entitled to
grant the relief of an injunction in any suit for infringement or passing off
which May be instituted before it. The relief of injunction may be in addition
to prayer for damages or an account of profits, together with or without any
order for the delivery of the infringing labels and marks for destructed or
erasure.

11\. While at action for infringement is taken in respect of trade marks which
are registered, an action passing off is in respect of goods for which the
marks have not been registered but in respect of which marks, over a period of
time, the user has acquired proprietary right. The difference between an
action for infringement and for passing off has been succinctly explained by
the Supreme Court in the case of Caviar Pundit Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna
Pharmaceutical Laboratories, . The Court observed that there is a basic
difference between the causes of action and the right to relief in suits for
passing off and for infringement of a registered trade mark and it was also
incorrect to equate the essentials of a passing off action with those in
respect of an action complaining of an infringement of a registered trade
mark. The following passage clearly brings out the essential similarities and
the differences in respect of the relief's which may be claimed in the
aforesaid two types of causes of action (at pp. 989-990 of AIR) :

"The finding in favor of the appellant to which the learned Counsel drew our
attention was based upon dissimilarity of the packing in which the goods of
the two parties were vended the difference in the physical appearance of the
two packets by reason of the variation in their color and other features and
their general get-up together with the I circumstance that the name and
address, of the manufactory of the appellant's was prominently displayed on
his packets and these features were all setout for negative the respondent's
claim that the appellant had passed off his goods as those of the respondent.
These matters which are of the essence of the cause of action for relief on
the ground of passing off play but a limited role in an action for
infringement of a registered trade mark by the registered proprietor who has a
statutory right to that mark and who has a statutory remedy in the event of
the use by another of the mark or a colorable imitation thereof. While an
action for passing off is a Common Law remedy being in substance an action for
deceit, that is, a passing off by a person of his own goods as those of
another, that is not the gist of an action for infringement. The action for
infringement is a statutory remedy conferred on the registered proprietor of a
registered trade mark for the vindication of "the exclusive right to the use
of the trade mark in relation to those, goods" (Vide S. 21 of the Act). The
use by the defendant of the trade mark of the plaintiff is not essential in an
action for passing off, but is the sine qua non in the case of an action for
infringement. No doubt, where the evidence in respect of passing off consists
merely of the colorable use of a registered trade mark, the essential features
of both the actions might coincide in the sense that what would be a colorable
imitation of a trade mark in a passing off action would also be such in an
action for infringement of the same trade mark. But there the correspondence
between the two ceases. In an action for infringement, the plaintiff must, no
doubt, make out that the use of the defendant's mark is so close either
visually, phonetically or otherwise and the court reaches the conclusion that
there is an imitation; no further evidence is required to establish that the
plaintiffs rights are violated. Expressed in another way, if the essential
features of the trade mark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the
defendant, the fact that the getup, packing and other writing or marks on the
goods or on the packets in which he offers his goods for sale show marked
differences, or indicate clearly a trade origin different from that of the
registered proprietor of the mark would be immaterial; whereas in the case of
passing off, the defendant may escape liability if he can show that the added
matter is sufficient to distinguish his goods from those of the plaintiff.

12\. As already observed earlier, in the instant case the action is for
infringement of the plaintiff s registered trade mark. As stated by the
Supreme Court in Durga Dutt Sharma's case (supra), for such an action to
succeed the plaintiff has merely to show that the essential features of the
trade mark have been adopted by the defendant. This is because in such an
action the plaintiff exercises or invokes his statutory right granted u/s. 28
of the Trade Marks Act, which gives him the exclusive right to use the said
mark.

13\. Experience has shown that in cases involving infringement of intellectual
property rights, considerable importance is attached to the decision of the
application for the grant of interim relief. Filing of such an application has
been commented upon by Kerry in Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names at page 320
as follows:

"The plaintiff in an infringement or "passing-off" action may move, as soon as
the action is commenced, for an interlocutory injunction to restrain the
defendant, until the hearing of the action or further order, from continuing
or committing the infringement or deceptive conduct of which he complains.
Quite apart from the advantages of stopping the infringement without delay,
experience shows that a successful motion for interlocutory injunction
normally puts an end to the litigation and the infringement, with a great
saving in expense compared with a full trial. Accordingly, such a motion
should be considered in every case; and, accordingly, proprietors of
trademarks should make it a rule to take action upon every instance of
infringement with the necessary speed to enable such a motion to be launched.
In extremely urgent cases an ex-parte injunction may be obtained before the
full hearing of the motion or an "Anton Piller" order, for inspection of the
defenant's premises without prior warning and discovery of his records, may be
obtainable."

The principles on which interlocutory relief is grandest in such cases in
England is clear from the following passage from Kerly's book at page 321:

"A plaintiff applying for interlocutory relief must show an arguable case
against the defendant, and that (if he is right) continuance of the
defendant's activities until the trial is likely to cause substantial damage
to him that is irreparable in the sense that it will not be compensated by an
order for damages at the trial. He need not in general show a strong prima
facie case say, a 20 per cent, chance of success at the trial will do but
something more is needed than a case that will avoid being struck out as
frivolous or vexatious. In trade-mark infringement cases irreparable damage,
in this sense, is relatively easily shown, since infringement may easily
destroy the value of a mark or at least nullify expensive' advertising in a
way that is hard to quantify for the purpose of an inquiry into damages."

14\. The aforesaid opinion was based on a number of cases including the case
of, American Cyanamid v. Ethicon, (1975) RPC 513. The case of American
Cyanamid was analyzed by Brian C. Reid in his book "A practical Guide to
Patent Law" and he summarized the judgment of Lord Diplock, in which he had
enunciated the need for stepwise approach to the grant of an interlocutory,
relief, in the following words:

"(1) Does P. (Plaintiff) have an arguable case? If the answer is 'no', P fails
in liming. But if the answer is 'yes', proceed to step (2).

(2) Assuming that P was to win at trial. Can he be adequately compensated by
damages? If the answer is yes, then no injunction. But if the answer signal,
proceed to step (3).

(3) Assuming, conversely, that D (defendant) was to win at trial, could be
adequately compensated for his interim exclusion from the market by P's cross
undertaking in damages? If the answer is 'no' then no injunction. But if the
answer is 'yes', the adequacy in itself provides no ground to refuse
injunction - which conclusion is not tantamount to finding that an injunction
should be granted. So then (as well as in any case where 'adequacy' of damages
in step (2) or (3) is, on the evidence adduced, doubtful proceed to step (4).

(4) Where lies the balance of convenience generally? If the balance is tilted
neither way, then proceed to step(5).

(5). Where lies the status quo? This should be preserved, as far as possible.,
But if this test still fails to tip the scales one way or the other, then
proceed to the final step (6).

(6) Which party has the apparently stronger case on the evidence adduced?
Decide in favor of the stronger party, provided that there is a clear
disproportion in relative strength."

15\. The position in America is not very different from that what has been
stated hereinabove. In 'Trade-marks and Unfair Competition by J. Thomas
Mocarthy, relying upon the decisions in America, five basic criteria have been
laid down which must guide the Court while exercising its discretion whether
to grant a preliminary injunction or not. These five criteria are as follows:

"(1) Can plaintiff show a probability of success at the ultimate trial on the
merit?

(2) Can plaintiff show that he will suffer "irreparable injury" pending a full
trial on the merits?

(3) Will a preliminary injunction preserve the "status quo" which preceded the
dispute?

(4) Do the hardships balance in favor of plaintiff?

(5) Is a preliminary injunction necessary to protect third parties."

16\. It has been contended by the learned counsel for the defendants that
there has been inordinate delay on the part of the plaintiffs in approaching
this Court and, therefore, on this ground alone no interim relief should be
granted. It is also submitted by Mr. Anand that he is entitled, in this ease,
to raise successfully the other equitable defense of the plaintiffs having
acquiesced to the defendants' user of the impugned mark.

17\. It has first to be considered as to what is the meaning, which has been
ascribed to the expressions "inordinate delay", "laces" and "acquiescence".

18\. Shri Anand, learned counsel for the defendants, has fairly conceded that
mere delay, without anything more, cannot by itself be regarded as a good
defense. This also seems to be the correct position in law. 'Inordinate
delay', however, has been a factor, which has been taken into consideration
while declining the relief of a grant of temporary injunction. In the case of
Vine Products Limited v. Mackenzie & Company Limited, (1969) RPC 1, the delay
in approaching the Court was nearly 100 years. The question in that case was
whether the plaintiffs were entitled to a declaration that they could call
their product British Sherry. The defendants filed a counter-claim for an
injunction to restrain the plaintiffs from passing, off their wines as Sherry
which was the produce of Jerez District of Spain. The Court held that the word
"Sherry" had been used for British products of the same type of wine for
nearly a hundred years and, therefore, there-was inordinate delay on the part
of the defendants and they were not entitled to the grant of an injunction. A
declaration was issued whereby the plaintiffs were entitled to call their
products British Sherry. In the case of Cluett, Peabody & Co. v. McIntyre,
Hogg Marsh & Co. (1958) RPC 35 an injunction was not granted because the
plaintiffs had, approached the Court after nearly 30 years. 'Inordinate delay'
would, therefore, be delay of such a long duration that the defendant could
have come to the conclusion that the plaintiff has, possibly, abandoned his
right to seek relief or to object to the defendant using the trade mark.
"Equity aids the vigilant, not those who slumber on their rights".

19\. It would appear that 'inordinate delay', which has never been defined by
the Courts so far, would be analogous or similar to 'laces'. In Whitman v.
Disney Productions, 263 F2d 229 it was observed by the 9th Circuit Court of
Appeal in U.S.A. as follows:

"Mere passage of time cannot constitute laces, but if the passage of time can
be shown to have lulled defendant into a false sense of security, and the
defendant acts in reliance thereon, laces may, in the discretion of the trial
Court, be found."

It would follow, logically, that delay by itself is not a sufficient defense
to an action for interim injunction, but delay coupled with prejudice caused
to the defendant would amount to 'laces'. As observed by McCarthy at page 383
"Laces - delay X prejudice". In this formula, it is the magnitude of the
product of delay and prejudice which must be weighed, not the magnitude of
solely the quantum of delay or prejudice alone. For example, in one case, a
long delay coupled with even a slight amount of prejudice may suffice to prove
an adequate defense of laces. Yet, in another case, a short delay coupled with
a great amount of resulting prejudice to defendant may also suffice for
laces". It has been emphasized that it is for the defendant to show Thai there
has been prejudice caused by reason of the delay and that it would be unfair
to inject the defendant from carrying out its activities.

20\. "Laces" and "Inordinate delay" however, are not similar to
"acquiescence". Acquiescence is a different concept, which has been explained
by Kerly at Page 310, para 15.45 as follows:

"The classic case of acquiescence proper is where the proprietor, knowing of
his rights and knowing that the infringe is ignorant of them, does something
to encourage the infringer's misapprehension, with the result that the
infringe acts upon his mistaken belief and so worsens his position. It seems
clear that something legs than that is needed to offer a defense, but how much
less is not clear. The current tendency is to hold that a defense of
acquiescence or laces may be set up whenever it is unconscionable for the
plaintiff to deny anything that he (consciously or unconsciously) has allowed
or encore aged the defendant to believe. Mere failure to without some positive
act of encouragement is not in general enough to give a defense. A defendant
who infringes knowing of the plaintiffs mark can hardly complain if he is
later sued upon it, nor is a defendant who starts to infringe without
searching the Register of Trade Marks in any better position than if he had
searched and so learned of the plaintiffs mark. Acts of the proprietor done in
ignorance of the infringement, or even done without his own registration in
mind, will not amount to acquiescence. A defense of estoppels by acquiescence
is to be distinguished from a defense that by delay the mark has become public
juris."

One of the cases relied upon by Kerly is that of Electro lax v. Electrix,
(1953) 71 RPC 23. In that case the defendants had been using the mark Electric
for a period of ten years. The plaintiffs filed a suit for injunction alleging
that the use of the mark by the defendant amounted to an infringement of the
plaintiffs registered mark. The defendant alleged that, there was a bona fide
user of the mark, by them. It was sought to be contended that the plaintiffs
had acquiesced to the defendants' user and, therefore, were not entitled to
any relief. Ever shed M.R. first dealt with the question as to what would
amount to acquiescence. It was observed by him as follows:

"Upon this matter, a great deal of learning has been referred to, and we have
also had our attention drawn to a number of cases. The latter include the
well-known statement in Willmott v. Barber, (1880) 15 Ch D 96 by Fry, J. (as
he then was) at p. 105. He said this: "It has been said that the acquiescence
which will deprive a man of his legal rights must amount to fraud, and in my
view that is an abbreviated statement of. a very true proposition. A man is
not to be deprived of his legal rights unless he has acted in such a way as
would make it fraudulent for him to set up those right&'. Let me pause here to
say that I do not understand that, by the, word "fraudulent', the learned
Judge was thereby indicating conduct which would amount to a common law tort
of deceit. "What, then, are, the elements or requisites necessary to continue
fraud of that description? In the first place the plaintiff must have made a
mistake as to his legal rights. Secondly, the plaintiff must have expended
some money or must have done some act (not necessarily upon the defendant's
land) on the faith of his mistaken belief. Thirdly, the defendant, the
possessor of the legal right, must know of the existence of his own right,
which is inconsistent with the right claimed by the plaintiff. If heroes not
know of it he is in the same-position as the plaintiff and the doctrine of
acquiescence is founded upon conduct with a knowledge of, your legal rights.
Fourthly, the defendant, the possessor of the legal right, must know of the
plaintiffs mistaken belief of his rights. If he does not, there is nothing
which calls upon him to assert his own rights. Lastly, the defendant, the
possessor of the legal right, must have encouraged the plaintiff in his
expenditure of money or in the other acts which he has done, either directly
or by abstaining from asserting his legal right". In reading that passage, it
is perhaps necessary to note (because it makes it at first sight a little more
difficult to follow) that the position of plaintiff and defendant as they are
usually met with are there transposed, and that one of the parties who is
there spoken of as the plaintiff corresponds with the present case with the
defendants, and vice versa.

21\. Applying the aforesaid test, the Court of Appeal concluded that there was
no fraud which had been played on the defendant by the plaintiff and that the
plaintiff was not guilty of acquiescence. A contention was also raised that
for a period of nearly ten years no action had been taken by the plaintiff
and, therefore, no relief should be granted. This contention was rejected by
Ever shed M.R. in the following words:

"I think, upon analysis, that Mr. Shelley's argument must, in the end of all,
come to this that the owner of a registered trade mark who for a substantial
period of time has lain by and not asserted his rights has lost those rights,
notwithstanding that they are rights conferred upon him by statute. I think so
to hold, at any rate in a case where the length of time involved is no greater
than in this case would be to introduce a wholly novel - nay, revolutionary -
doctrine, and I think also that it would be contrary to the principles laid
down by the decided cases."

The Court was of the opinion that unless something is added to delay the
defendant could not continue to use the infringing mark.

22\. It is not very clear, and this is still a very gray area, as to whether
acquiescence or laces will be regarded as, a good defense to the grant of a
permanent injunction in the case of infringement of a registered trademark.

23\. Some Courts have declined to grant interim injunction, on ground of laces
or acquiescence, while not refusing permanent injunction. In the American case
of Helena Rubenstein, Inc. v. Frances Denny Inc., 1968 DC (NY) 286 F Supp 132
it was observed as follows:

"While laces may not be a sufficient bar to a permanent injunction, it may
well be a bar to preliminary relief. A preliminary injunction is sought upon
the theory that there is an urgent need for speedy action to protect the
plaintiffs rights: By sleeping on its rights a plaintiff demonstrates the lack
of need for speedy relief and cannot complain of the delay involved pending
any final relief to which it may be entitled after a trial on all the issues.'

24\. As observed by McCarthy at page 388 "Later cases have developed this rule
into a two tier approach a given set of facts showing plaintiffs delay and
resulting prejudice to defendant may bar monetary recovery but will not bar
the issuance of an injunction against future infringements. The Supreme Court
later held while laces may not be sufficient to deny relief against instances
of "conscious infringement or fraudulent imitation", laces could bar relief
against a good faith, "innocent" infringe. That is, the, Supreme, Court held
that where defendant, in good faith, and without any prior notice of
plaintiffs rights, selected a mark confusingly similar to plaintiffs mark,
plaintiffs delay constituting laces; would bar the issuance of an injunction
as well as the granting of damages and profits.

25\. "However, if defendant acted fraudulently or with knowledge of plaintiffs
rights, then relief by injunction is accorded, even though laces and
acquiescence bar the recovery of damages or profits ............. The Courts
have been very reluctant to deny injunctive relief because of plaintiffs delay
when it appears that defendant knowingly and deliberately adopted the mark,
which is an infringement. If such facts are shown, only in an exceptional case
will laces bar injunctive relief'. In Anheuser-Busch v. DuBo is Brewing Co.,
175 F2d 370 the Court referred to "the doctrine that a fraudulent infringe
cannot expect tender mercy of a Court of equity so that mere delay by the
injured party in bringing suit would not bar injunctive relief."

26\. Dealing with delay and the question of grant of interlocutory
injunctions, W. W Kerr in his Treatise "On the Law and Practice of
Injunctions", Sixth Edition at pages 360 361 observed as follows:

"Mere delay after knowledge of the infringement to take proceedings, not
sufficient to call the Statute of Limitations into operation, or where the
infringement continues is not, it seems, a bar to the right of an injunction
at the trial. Lapse of time unaccompanied by anything else is, it seems, no
more a bar to a suit for an injunction in aid of the legal right than it is to
an action of deceit.

But delay may cause the Court to refuse an interlocutory injunction,
especially if the defendant has built up a trade in which he has notoriously
used the mark."

27\. It appears difficult for me to comprehend the distinction which the
Courts have sought to make between the grant of interim injunction and
permanent injunction If on the facts which are clearly discernible from the
record it appears that after trial a permanent injunction is likely to be
granted, notwithstanding the delay on the part of the plaintiff in approaching
the Court, there appears to be no reason as to why temporary injunction should
be refused.

28\. It is no doubt true that trade mark copyright or a patent belongs to a
registered owner and, in that sense, is his monopoly because he has the
exclusive right to use the same. Nevertheless, especially as far as trade
marks are concerned, the said mark is also meant to distinguish the goods of
the owner of the mark from that of the other manufacturers. This
distinguishing mark is primarily, probably solely, for the benefit of the
consumer. A trade mark is a representation by the owner to the consumer
informing him that the goods in question bearing a particular trade mark have
been manufactured or marketed by the owner of the mark. With the passage of
time, if the goods are of good quality and become popular, the trade mark
becomes well known. People buy the goods after seeing the trade mark which is
applied to them. Especially in Third World Countries, where level of education
is not very high and where the consumer may not be proficient enough to read
what is written, possibly in a language which is unknown to the purchaser, the
trade mark assumes greater significance. It is the duty of the Courts to
protect the interest of such unwary customers. It is for the Court to see that
an unscrupulous infringe does not cheat the general public by selling spurious
goods by using trade marks which do not belong to him and which are associated
with goods of repute. It is no doubt true that giving protection to the
consumer would necessarily amount to giving relief to the plaintiff, even
though plaintiff may have slept over his right for a number of years. But yen
it becomes known that stolen property, and infringement amounts to stealing
another person's intellectual property, is being sold in the market to unwary
customers, it would be in the public interest that protection is granted to
the members of the public. It is not unknown, and indeed it is unfortunate
though common, that spurious medicines, life saving drugs and other articles
of general public use are illegally made or manufactured and sold in the
market. The manufacturer of the genuine products may not be adversely affected
by such sales and may not choose to approach the Court for a number of years
but, as far as the general public is concerned, the sale of spurious goods
results in the public spending good money for bad things. It is the general
public which is being cheated.

29\. If an action is taken by the registered owner and no interim injunction
is granted, the effect is that goods bearing the infringing mark or spurious
goods would continue to be sold in the market. After a number of years when
the case is finally disposed of, after trial, and the plaintiff succeeds and
gets a permanent injunction then, possibly, the plaintiff may also be
compensated by his being awarded damages or an account of profits. In that
sense the non-grant of the interim injunction would not, ultimately, prejudice
the plaintiff for he may be compensated with payment of money but during this
period when the defendant is allowed to continue to infringe the intellectual
property it is the consumer or the purchaser who alone suffers and who
ultimately cannot be compensated. Therefore, in order to curb the menace of
manufacture, production and sale of spurious goods and the blatant violation
of intellectual property it will be proper for the Court to take into
consideration the interest of the general public. In this regard reference may
usefully be made to the following observations of McCarthy at page 346, para
30.21, which deals with the protection of third parties:

"Some Courts also consider the necessity of protecting third parties. In trade
mark infringement cases, "third parties" means the buying public. If the
equities are closely balanced, the right of the public not to be deceived or
confused may turn the scales in favor of a preliminary injunction."

30\. It would appear to be difficult to accept hat relief of temporary
injunction should not be granted, because of the delay on, the part of the
plaintiff, even though the Court feels, at that point of time, that,
ultimately permanent injunction will have to be granted.

31\. Even though there may be some doubt as to whether laces or acquiescence
can deny the relief of a permanent injunction, judicial opinion has been
consistent in holding that if the defendant acts fraudulently with the
knowledge that he is violating the plaintiff s rights then in that case, even
if there is an inordinate delay on the part of the plaintiff in taking action
against the defendant, the relief of injunction is not denied. The defense of
laces or inordinate delay is a defense in equity. Inequity both the parties
mud's come to the Court with clean hands. An equitable defense can be put up
by a party who has acted fairly and honestly. A person who is guilty of
violating the law or infringing or usurping somebody else's right cannot
clarify the continued misuse of the usurped right. It was observed by Romer,
J. in the matter of an application brought be J. R. Parkington and Co. Ld.,
(1946) 63 RPC 171 at page 181 that "in my judgment, the circumstances which
attend the adoption of a trade mark in the first instance are of considerable
importance when one comes to consider whether the use of that mark has or has
not been a honest user. If the user in its inception was tainted it would be
difficult in most cases to purify it subsequently". It was further noted by
the learned Judge in that case that he could not regard the discreditable
origin of the user as cleansed by the subsequent history. In other words, the
equitable relief will be afforded only to that party who is not guilty of a
fraud and whose conduct shows that, there had been, on his part, an honest
concurrent user of the mark in question. If a party, for no apparent or a
valid reason, adopts, with or without modifications, a mark belonging to
another, whether registered or not, it will be difficult for that party to
avoid an order of injunction because the Court may rightly assume that such
adoption of the mark by the party was noting honest one. The Court would be
justified in concluding that the defendant, in such an action, wanted to cash
in on the plaintiffs name and reputation and that was the sole, primary or the
real motive of the defendant adopting such a mark. Even if, in such a case,
there may be an inordinate delay on the part of the plaintiff in bringing a
suit for injunction, the application of the plaintiff for an interim
injunction cannot be dismissed on the ground that the defendant has been using
the mark for a number of years. Dealing with this aspect Harry D. Nims in his
"The Law of Unfair Competition and Trade Marks", Fourth Edition, Volume Two at
page 1282 noted as follows:

"Where infringement is deliberate and willful and the defendant acts
fraudulently with knowledge that he is violating plaintiff s rights, essential
elements of estoppels are lacking and in such a case the protection of
plaintiffs rights by injunctive relief never is properly denied. "The doctrine
of estoppels can only be invoked to promote fair dealings"."

32\. It would paper to the where there is an honest concurrent user by the
defendant then inordinate delay or laces may defeat the claim of damage r
rendition of accounts but the relief of injunction should not be refused. This
is so because it is the interest of the general public, which is the third
party in such cases, which has to be kept in mind. In the case of inordinate
delay or laches, as distinguished from the case of an acquiescence, the main
prejudice which may be caused to the defendant is that by reason of the
plaintiff not acting at an earlier point of time the defendant has been able
to establish his business by using the infringing mark. Inordinate delay or
laces may be there because the plaintiff may not be aware of the infringement
by the defendant or the plaintiff may consider such infringement by the
defendant as not being serious enough to hurt the plaintiffs business.
Nevertheless, if the Court comes to the conclusion that prejudice is likely to
be caused to the general public who may be misled into buying the goods
manufactured by the defendant thinking them to be the goods of the plaintiff
then an injunction must be issued. The Court may, in appropriate cases, allow
some time to the defendants to sell off their existing stock but an injunction
should not be denied.

33\. Where the plaintiff, however, is guilty of acquiescence, there different
considerations may apply. As already noted, acquiescence may mean an
encouragement by the plaintiff to the defendant to use the infringing mark. It
is as if the plaintiff wants the defendant to be under the belief that the
plaintiff does not regard the action of the defendant as being volatile of the
plaintiff s rights. Furthermore, there should be a tacit or an express assent
by the -plaintiff to the defendant's using the mark and in a way encouraging
the defendants to continue with the business. In such a case the infringe acts
upon an honest mistaken belief that he is not infringing the trade mark of the
plaintiff and if, after a period of time when the infringe has established the
business, reputation, the plaintiff turns around and brings an action for
injunction, the defendant would be entitled to raise the defense of
acquiescence. Acquiescence may be a good defense even to the grant of a
permanent injunction because the defendant may legitimately contend that the
encouragement of the plaintiff to the defendant's use of the mark in effect
amounted to the abandonment by the plaintiff of his right in favor of the
defendant and, over a period of time, the general public has accepted the
goods of the defendant resulting in increase of its sale. It may, however, be
stated that it will be for the defendant in such cases to prove acquiescence
by the plaintiff. Acquiescence cannot be inferred merely by reason of the Jack
that the plaintiff has not taken any action against the infringement of, its
rights.

34\. Applying the aforesaid principles to the present case, I find that there
is no reason as to why the ad interim injunction should not be made absolute.
As already noted, it has been strenuously contended by the learned counsel for
the defendants that the plaintiffs are guilty of inordinate delay, laces and
acquiescence but before considering this, an important factor which has to be
seen is whether the user or adoption by the defendant was honest or
fraudulent.

35\. The facts on the record speak for themselves. It is not in dispute that
the plaintiffs are the owners of the registered trade mark Nataraj including
the device. The defendants chose not to approach the Trade Mark Authorities
hut filed an application under the Copyright Act for registration of the
copyright. This application was filed and copyright registered, long after the
mark of the plaintiff had been registered under the Trade Marks Act. The
defendants have used the same spelling for the word "Nataraj" as have been
used by the plaintiff. Ordinarily; Nataraj is spelt as 'Natraj' but the
plaintiff in its registered trade mark had spelt it as Nataraj. The defendants
have also spelt their mark with an additional' a after the letter. Not only
this, the device of the dancing Nataraj which was registered by the plaintiff
is the one which has been copied by the defendants. There are innumerable
poses of the dancing Nataraj which are known in this country. The device of
the plaintiff which has been registered appears to have been adopted from the
photograph of a bronze piece of Nataraj. The mark used by the defendants is
identical to this dancing figure.

36\. Moreover, on the cartons of the defendants neither the name nor the
address of the manufacturer is indicated. If the defendants wanted to
establish their independent user of the word 'Nataraj' along with the device,
one would have expected the defendants to write their name and address on the
cartons. By not writing the name and address of the manufacturer on the
cartons of the defendants, it appears to me that an effort was being made to
mislead the general public. The endeavor clearly was that persons should buy
pins and clips manufactured by the defendants assuming that the same were
manufactured by the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs are not only the registered
owners of the name and device Nataraj but their sales are over 8 crores are.
The trade mark is famous all over India. If the defendants had written their
name and address on the cartons, it is possible that some persons may not have
brought the same but in the absence of the name of the manufacturer being
there on the cartons, the general public were being led to believe that it is
the true owner of the trade mark Nataraj who had manufactured the said pins.
In my opinion the use or adoption of the mark Nataraj by the defendants was
clearly fraudulent.

37\. It was submitted by the learned counsel for the defendants that the
plaintiffs have not objected to the use of the mark by the defendants it was
submitted that the only action which was taken by the plaintiffs was to apply
to the Registrar of Copyright for cancellation of the registration. The
plaintiffs did not, it was argued, take any action in Court for injunction the
defendants from using the mark and nor did the plaintiffs, it is submitted,
send any notice to the defendants asking them to refrain from using the mark.
It was contended that by the plaintiffs limiting their action to filing an
application for cancellation of the copyright led the defendants to believe
that the plaintiffs were not objecting to the defendants' use of the mark and
this amounts to acquiescence on the part of the plaintiffs.

38\. There is no force in the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for
the, defendants. As has already been noted, acquiescence means something more
than mere silence on the part of the plaintiffs. Acquiescence means
encouragement on the part of the plaintiff to the defendant. There should be a
mistaken belief by the defendant that there is no objection to the plaintiff
using its mark. In the present case the plaintiffs have taken action by
applying to the Registrar of Copyright for cancellation of the registration
which had been granted to the defendant. In the application for cancellation
it has been specifically stated by the plaintiffs that the use of the
infringing label has adversely affected the business of the, plaintiffs. It is
true that no specific notice was sent to the defendant asking the defendant
not to use the mark and it is further correct that no suit for injunction was
immediately filed. Such non-action may disentitle the plaintiff for the award
of damages or rendition of accounts, but such inaction does not show any
consent or acquiescence on the part of the plaintiff to the defendant's using
the said mark. No overt act has been done by the plaintiffs which could, in
any manner, amount to encouraging the defendant to continue to use the
infringing mark.

39\. It had been submitted that there was inordinate delay on the part of the
plaint: in filing the present suit. I have already held that inordinate delay
would not defeat an action for the grant of a temporary injunction especially
where the use by the defendant of the mark was fraudulent. An any case, in my
opinion, the delay in the present case cannot be regarded as inordinate.
Assuming for the sake of argument that, as contended by the defendants, the
plaintiffs came to know about the user by the defendants of the infringing
mark in Mar., 1982, it is not as if the plaintiffs slept over their rights for
a number of years. It is to be seen that the plaintiffs' principal place of
business is in Bombay while the defendant is a small businessman carrying on
its business in Sadar Bdzar, Delhi. The plaintiffs, in 1985, did filed in
application for cancellation of the registration of copyright of the
defendant. This amounted to first step being taken by it. The plaintiffs
waited and within 3 years thereafter filed the present suit. The defendant
must have known that it was adopting a mark which belongs to some one else.
Any infringe who uses or adopts some one else's mark must be aware of the
consequences which may follow. The defendants ran the risk in using a mark
which belonged to some one else. It continued its business uninterruptedly for
a number of years before any action was taken by the plaintiffs against it.
Any growth after notice is at the risk and peril of the defendant: The
defendant certainly had notice of application of the plaintiff having been
filed against it in the year 1985 for cancellation of registration of the
copyright. The defendant should have been warned, at that stage, that the
plaintiff is not likely to accept the user of its mark by the defendant. If
the defendant continued to do business by using the impugned mark, it did so
at its own peril. The continued user cannot be set up as a defense under these
circumstances.

40\. As has already been noted, it is not in dispute that the mark which is
used by the defendants is similar, if not identical, to that of the registered
mark of the plaintiffs. There is, therefore, a clear breach of the plaintiffs'
rights under S. 28 of the Trade Marks Act. The plaintiffs are not guilty of
inordinate delay or acquiescence and are entitled to the interim relief of an
injunction.

41\. For the aforesaid reasons, I restrain the defendants by an interim
injunction from using the offending mark 'NATARAJ' and the device of Nataraj
or any similar mark or device which is an infringement on the plaintiffs
registered trade mark Nos. 260466 and 283730 in respect of stationery pins and
other stationery items till the final decision of the present suit.

42\. I.A. stands disposed of. Parties will bear their own costs.

43\. Order accordingly.

