

Supreme Court of India

Wander Ltd. And Anr. vs Antox India P. Ltd. on 26 April, 1990

Equivalent citations: 1990 (2) ARBLR 399 SC, 1990 Supp (1) SCC 727

Author: O Venkatachaliah

Bench: M Venkatachaliah, N Ojha, J Verma

ORDER Venkatachaliah, Ojha, J.

1\. Appellants in these appeals by Special Leave, are the Defendants in Civil
Suit No. 1220 of 1988 on the original side of the High Court of Madras and
assail the order dated 19-1-1990 of the Division Bench of the High Court
granting in appeal and in reversal of the order dated 2-3-1989 of the learned
single Judge trying the suit an injunction restraining appellants from
passing-off their medicinal product Cal-De-Ce as that of the Respondent-
Plaintiff, Respondent claimed to have acquired a right in that Trade-mark by
continuous user. The temporary injunction was refused by the learned Single-
Judge. But in appeals, O.S.A. Nos. 111 and 112 of 1989, preferred against the
refusal, the division bench granted the temporary injunction in appeal,

2\. The appeals have come up for orders on the prayer for stay. As the
considerations relevant for decision on the prayer for stay, by and large,
conclude the subject-matter of the main appeals, we proceed to dispose of the
main appeals themselves.

We have heard Sri F.S. Nariman, learned Senior Counsel for the appellants and
Sri U.N.R. Rao, learned Senior Counsel for the respondents. We have been taken
through the orders of the learned trial-Judge and of the Division Bench in
appeal.

3\. Wander Ltd., first appellant, claiming to be registered proprietor of the
Registered Trade-mark Cal-De-Ce entered into an agreement dated 28-3-1986 with
Antox India (P) Ltd. (Antox), the respondent, under which Antox agreed to
manufacture vitaminsed Calcium Gluconate Tablets under the said registered
Trade-Mark Cal-De-Ce and sell the entire production to the Wander Ltd. It
would appear that pursuant to and in implementation of these arrangements
Antox applied for the requisite manufacturing-license from the Drug Controller
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, in the course of the processing of
which Wander Ltd. furnished before the Drug Controller an undertaking that
Wander Ltd., would not authorize the use of its Trade-Mark Cal-De-Ce by any
other company and further not to manufacture Cal-De-Ce with effect from 1st
July, 1986, either by itself or under sole licenses from it. The Drug
Controller issued the manufacturing licence to Antox.

The working of the agreement dated 28-3-198.6 between the parties, however,
appears to have run into serious troubles. It is not necessary to advert to
the rival contentions of the parties on the merits of this controversy as they
may have to be gone into by the High Court in the pending suit. The disputes
culminated in Wander Ltd., purporting to rescind the agreement by its notice
dated 30th November, 1988 and calling upon Antox to stop manufacture of Cal-
De-Ce under the Trade-mark. It would also appear that Wander Ltd., entered
into a separate manufacturing arrangement with Alfred Berg & Co. (I) Pvt.
Ltd., the second appellant, at Madras, under licenses issued to the second
appellant by the authority administering the Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 in
that State.

It is at this stage that the Antox came forward with the present suit and
sought temporary injunction.

4\. The case of Antox is that its agreement dated 28-2-1986 with Wander Ltd.,
was itself void in that its object was one forbidden by law ; that it would,
if permitted defeat and violate several statutory provisions and prohibitions,
that the agreement thus, out of way, the undertaking furnished on 21st June
1986 by Wander Ltd., to the Drug Controller in Karnataka, had the effect, in
law, of and amounted to an abandonment by Wander Ltd., of its proprietorship
of the Registered Trade-Mark Cal-De-Ce and all of such exclusive rights as
Wander Ltd., had or may have had in respect of that Trade-Mark and that the
subsequent continued user of the said Trade-Mark by Antox under the Drug
Controller's licence amounted to an independent user of the Trade-Mark by
Antox in its own right as, indeed, according to Antox, the said Trade-Mark
after its abandonment by Wander Ltd., came to be in an ascent unwonted
condition eligible to be picked up and used by any body. It was said that the
user of the Trade-Mark by Antox after 21st of June 1986 amounted to such an
independent user on the strength of which Antox claimed that it was entitled
to maintain a passing off action even against Wander Ltd. The mere earlier
registration of the Trade-Mark by Wander Ltd., it is urged, is no evidence of
earlier user and with the abandonment of the Trade-Mark by Wander Ltd. Antox
is entitled on the strength of its continuous user, to restrain Wander Ltd.
from manufacture.

The point for consideration is whether there is a prima facie case on which
Antox could be held entitled to restrain Wander Ltd. and Alfred Berg from
manufacturing and marketing goods under the Trade name Cal-De-Ce and whether
on considerations of balance of convenience and comparative hardship a
temporary injunction should issue. The corollary is that even if the
injunction sought by Antox is refused, that does not, ipso-facto, entitled
Wander Ltd. and Alfred Berg to manufacture and market the goods if they are
not otherwise entitled to do so under the relevant laws regulating the matter.

5\. Usually, the prayer for grant of an interlocutory injunction is at a stage
when the existence of the legal right asserted by the plaintiff and its
alleged violation are both contested and uncertain and remain uncertain till
they are established at the trial on evidence. The court, at this stage, acts
on certain well settled principles of administration of this form of
interlocutory remedy which is both temporary and discretionary. The object of
the interlocutory injucntion, it is stated is to protect the plaintiff against
injury by violation of his rights for which he could not adequately be
compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the uncertainty were
resolved in his favour at the trial. The need for such protection must be
weighed against the corresponding need of the defendant to be protected
against injury resulting from his having been prevented from exercising his
own legal rights for which he could not be adequately compensated. The court
must weigh one need against another and determine where the "balance of
convenience lies". The interlocutory remedy is intended to preserve in status
quo, the rights of parties which may appear on a prima facie. The court also,
in restraining a defendant from exercising what he considers his legal right
but what the plaintiff would like to be prevented, puts into the scales, as a
relevant consideration whether the defendant has yet to commence his
enterprise or whether he has already been doing so in which latter case
considerations somewhat different from those that apply to a case where the
defendant is yet to commence his enterprise, are attracted.

6\. In the present case, the learned single Judge held that, at all events as
between Antox and Wander Ltd. even to the extent considerations relevant for a
passing-off action go, the latter was undisputably the earlier user of the
Trade-Mark in that Wander Ltd. was manufacturing and marketing the Calcium
Glouconate Vitamin Tablets under the Trade-Mark Cal-De-Ce at its own factory
in Bombay from August 1983 upto June 1986. If this is correct, Antox's user
cannot be held to be prior user. It is pertinent to note, and perhaps
emphasise, that the appellate bench did not disturb this finding at all.
Learned Single Judge was persuaded to the view that, in any event so far as
the prima facie position as to the test of earlier user is concerned Antox
could not be held entitled to interlocutory order in its favour on the basis
of the earlier user claimed by it. The interlocutory relief was accordingly
refused against both Wander and Alfered Berg.

7\. Aggrieved by this order of the Trial Judge declining the interlocutory
injunction Antox preferred O.S.A. Nos. 111-112 of 1989 before the Division
Bench. The Division Bench, however, re-assessed the material considered by the
single Judge and came to a different conclusion. The Division Bench held :

The plaintiffs had licenses to manufacture for sale with the trade names and
had indeed sold the manufactured stock in bulk to the defendants Its user of
the trade marks pursuant to the licence obtained, was nut the user of the
registered user under Sections 48 and 49 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, not was its manufacture carried out in pursuance of any loan licence
taken out by the defendant under rule 69-A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.

The plaintiffs manufacture with the trade names, under licenses in the trade
names and the consequent user of the trade names establish a prima facie case
for passing off action and the balance of convenience, requiring and the
status quo to be maintained, the plaintiff having had the benefit of the
injunction from 23-9-1988 till 2-3-1989 when it was vacated and from 2-5-1989
when this Court granted the injunction, the plaintiff would be entitled to
have the interim injunction as prayed for by them.

Appellants-Defendants have come up in appeal here.

8\. On a consideration of the matter, we are afraid, the Appellate Bench fell
into error on own important propositions. The first is a misdirection in
regard to the very scope and nature of the appeals before it and the
limitations on the powers of the Appellate Court to substitute its own
discretion in an appeal preferred against a discretionary order. The second
pertains to the infirmities in the ratiocinations as to the quality of Antox's
alleged user of the Trade-Mark on which the passing-off action is founded. We
shall deal with these two separately.

9\. The appeals before the Division Bench were against the exercise of
discretion by the Single Judge. In such appeals, the Appellate Court will not
interfere with the exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and
substitute its own discretion except where the discretion has been shown to
have been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or perversely or where the
court had ignored the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of
interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against exercise of discretion is said to
be an appeal on principle. Appellate Court will not reassess the material and
seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the court below
if the one reached by the court was reasonably possible on the material. The
appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the
exercise of discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had
considered the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary
conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the Trial Court reasonably
and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken a
different view may not justify interference with the trial court's exercise of
discretion. After referring to these principles Gajendragadkar, J. in Printers
(Mysore) Private Ltd. v. Pothan Joseph :

... These principles are well established, but as has been observed by
Viscount Simon in Charles Osention & Co. v. Johnston the law as to the
reversal by a court of appeal of an order made by a judge below in the
exercise of his discretion is well established, and any difficulty that arises
is due only to the application of well settled principles in an individual
case.

The appellate judgment does not seem to defer to this principle.

10\. We may now examine the tenability of the grounds on which a Division
Bench reversed the single Judge's refusal. The passing-off action was based on
the asserted right to a trade mark said to have been acquired by continuous
user. According to the appellate-bench the user by Antox pursuant to the Drug-
Controller's licence and after the under taking given by Wander Ltd. "was not
registered user under Sections 48 and 49 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act nor was it a manufacture carried out in pursuance of a loan because......"
In-passing-off action this would be relevant only in a negative way.
Positively, the plaintiff must establish a prior user of his own prima facie.
Antox's case appears silent on this requirement in the context of a specific
finding of the single judge as to user by Wander Ltd. prior to June, 1986.
Antox's user is admittedly after June, 1986.

An infringement action is available where there is violation of specific
property-right acquired under and recognised by the statute. In a passing-of
action, however, the plaintiff's right is independent of such a statutory
right to a trade mark and is against the conduct of the defendant which lends
to or is intended or calculated to lead to deception. Passing-off is said to
be a species of unfair trade competition or of actionable unfair trading by
which one person, through deception, attempts to obtain an economic benefit of
the reputation which another has established for himself in a particular trade
or business. The action is regarded as an action for deceit. The tort of
passing-off involves a misrepresentation made by a trade to his prospective
customers calculated to injure, as a reasonably foreseeable consequence, the
business or goodwill of another which actually or probably, causes damage to
the business or goodwill of the other trader. Speaking of the legal
classification of this form of action, Lord Diplock said :

Unfair trading as a wrong actionable at the suit of other traders who thereby
suffer loss of business or goodwill may take a variety of forms to some of
which separate lables have become attached in English law. Conspiracy to
injure a person in his trade or business is one, slander of goods another but
most protean is that which is generally and nowadays, perhaps misleadingly,
described as "passing off". The form that unfair trading takes will alter with
the ways in which trade is carried on and business reputation and goodwill
acquired. Emerson's maker of the better mousetrap if secluded in his house
built in the woods would today be unlikely to find a path beaten to his door
in the absence of a costly advertising campaign to acquaint the public with
the excellence of his wares" See Erven Warnink B.V. v. J. Towhand & Sons
(Hull) Ltd. 1979 All E.R. 731.

11\. Antox says that it is free from the inhibitions of the terms of the
agreement dated 28th March 1986 on the ground that agreement is itself void
for all purposes and, therefore, do not attach to or diminish the quality of
its user, though commenced under that agreement. Antox says its user is
referable to the Drug Controller's licence. But even assuming that the terms
of the agreement dated 28th March 1986 are not to be put into the scales to
determine the title to and character of the user by Antox, two crucial
positions still stage Antox in the face.

The first is that the Drug Controller's licence claimed by Antox as the source
of its right to the user of the trade-mark, itself expressly stipulates that
the goods to be manufactured pursuant to the said licence shall be goods under
the registered Trade-mark, of Wander Ltd. The effect of this on the quality of
the user has not been examined by the Appellate-Bench.

Secondly, even if a prior registration of a Trade mark is not necessarily
evidence of prior user as contended by Sri Raa, Antox cannot, prima facie,
explain how in a passing-off action its user subsequent to June 1986 would
prevail over the prima facie finding that Wander Ltd. was manufacturing
Calcium Gluconate Tablets under the trade-mark Cal-De-Ce at its own factory in
Bombay from August 1983 to June 1986. The Appellate Bench does not dislodge
this finding nor does it recognise the crucial effect of prior use by the
defendant on the plaintiff's case in a passing-off action. It appears to us
that it was not an appropriate case where the appellate Bench could have
interfered with the discretion exercised by the learned Single, Judge.

12\. We, accordingly, allow these appeals, set aside order dated 19-1-1990 of
the Division Bench in so far as it pertains to Civil Suit of 1220/ 1988 and
restore the order dated 2-3-1989 made by the learned Single Judge on
Applications 4941 and 4942 of 1988. Since we are examining the matter at an
interlocutory stage, none of the observations contained in this order shall
affect the final decision of the suit on the merits after evidence.

13\. The order of the appellate Bench is common to the present suit as well as
certain other proceedings between Antox on the one hand and certain other
parties on the other. This judgment and the observations therein are confined
to the facts of Civil Suit No. 1220/1988. The correctness of the Appellate
Order in respect of other cases is not the subject-matter of these appeals and
that, therefore, whatever we have said shall not prejudice the parties in
those other proceedings.

Having regard to the nature of the controversy, it will be appropriate for the
High Court to dispose of the Suit expeditiously and we request the High Court
to dispose of the Suit within six months from today.

In the circumstances of this case, there will be no orders as to costs in the
appeals.

Antox (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. Wander Ltd.

1\. We have heard Sri U.N.R. Rao, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant and
Sri F.S. Nariman, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent.

Special leave granted.

2\. The grievance of the appellant is that its appeal before the Learned
Single-Judge of the High Court preferred against an interlocutory order
granting an injunction in a suit pending on the file of the District Court
Baroda was disposed of without giving opportunity to the learned Counsel for
the appellant to argue the matter.

3\. The matter admits of being disposed of on the basis of Sri Nariman's
suggestion which we consider a fair and generous one. Sri Nariman for the
respondent fairly consents to an order-and we accordingly make that order-
setting aside the order under appeal and remitting the matter to the High
Court for consideration afresh of the appeal for admission after affording
another opportunity to the appellant of being heard. The matter is disposed of
accordingly. No costs.

