

Delhi High Court

Allied Blenders & Distillers ... vs Paul P.John & Ors. on 29 September, 2008

Author: Pradeep Nandrajog

    
    
    *     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
    +                                 FAO (OS) 347/2008
    
          ALLIED BLENDERS & DISTILLERS P.LTD.      ..... Appellant
               Through: Mr. Sudhir Chandra, Sr. Adv.
                        Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. With
                        Mr. Praveen Anand, Mr. Sanjay Chhabra
                        and Mr. Mohit Lahoty, Advocates
    
    
                                      versus
    
          PAUL P. JOHN & ORS.                   ...... Respondents
               Through: Mr. Arun Jaitely, Sr. Adv.
                         Mr. Sanjay Jain, Sr. Adv. With
                         Mr. Sushant Singh, Advocate
    
    +                                 FAO (OS) 365/2008
    
          ALLIED BLENDERS & DISTILLERS P.LTD.      ..... Appellant
               Through: Mr. Sudhir Chandra, Sr. Adv.
                        Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. With
                        Mr. Praveen Anand, Mr. Sanjay Chhabra
                        and Mr. Mohit Lahoty, Advocates
    
    
                                      versus
    
          PAUL P. JOHN & ORS.                   ...... Respondents
               Through: Mr. Arun Jaitely, Sr. Adv.
                         Mr. Sanjay Jain, Sr. Adv. With
                         Mr. Sushant Singh, Advocate
    
    
                                      DATE OF DECISION:
    %                                    29.09.2008
    
    CORAM:
    
    *     Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
          Hon'ble Mr.Justice Sunil Gaur
    
    
    1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
    to see the judgment?                  Yes.
    
    
    FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008                         Page 1 of 16
     2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?             Yes.
    
    3. Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?                  Yes.
    
    
    PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
    

1\. By a common order dated 11.7.2008, five applications, three applications
filed in CS(OS) No.383/2007 and two applications filed in CS(OS) No.1058/2002
have been disposed of resulting in the appellant who was the plaintiff in both
suits not being held entitled to any interim injunction against the
respondents who were the defendants in the two suits. The result is that the
respondents have been permitted to sell whisky under the trade-mark/trade-name
„ORIGINAL CHOICE‟. However, the respondents have been directed to maintain
accounts in respect of the sales and make the sale available to the Court as
and when so directed.

2\. CS(OS) No.1058/2002 was filed somewhere in the middle of the year 2002;
action was for an alleged passing off. Appellant‟s application for
registration of the mark „OFFICERS CHOICE‟ was pending registration with the
Registrar of Trademarks in relation to whisky falling under class 33 of the
fourth schedule to the TM Rules. During the pendency of the said suit the
registration was granted on 19.4.2007 but with a disclaimer that the appellant
would not have any exclusive right FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 2 of
16 to the use of the word „CHOICE‟. Upon registration of the mark „OFFICERS
CHOICE‟ a second suit was filed being CS(OS) No.383/2007 maintaining an action
for infringement of the registered trademark of the appellant.

3\. The respondents had also applied for registration of their mark „ORIGINAL
CHOICE‟ which was registered by the Registrar of Trademarks in the year 2007.

4\. The appellant took recourse to the statutory remedy under the TM Act 1999
before the Intellectual Property Appellate Board questioning the registration
granted by the Registrar of Trademarks to the Mark „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟. Said
proceedings are still pending.

5\. Before the learned Single Judge on the original side of this Court, both
the suits were stayed by consent of parties in view of Section 124 of the TM
Act 1999. But, in view of sub- Section 5 of Section 124 of the TM Act 1999,
the interlocutory applications seeking interim orders were heard with a clear
understanding that the learned Trial Judge would consider the rival versions
in relation to the plea of passing off.

6\. The learned Trial Judge has declined the interim injunction as prayed for
by the appellant holding that the appellant was aware since 1995 that the
defendant was FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 3 of 16 marketing whisky
under the trade-mark/trade-name „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟ and that delay and
acquiescence being major considerations in an action for passing off, the case
of the appellant was seriously dented. With respect to the quantum of sale of
whisky effected by the respondents since 1996 it has been held that the same
show that the respondents grew substantially and the appellant sat by watching
the respondent grow in the market and hence was not entitled to the
discretionary relief of injunction. The second reason given by the learned
Trial Judge is that the labels used by the appellant and the respondents for
sale of their product do not give the impression that the bottles and the
labels of the respondents could be passed off as the bottle and label of the
appellant.

7\. Learned counsel for the parties argued the appeal in relation to the said
two findings of the learned Single Judge. Sh.Sudhir Chandra learned Senior
Counsel for the appellant urged that both views expressed by the learned Trial
Judge are unsound for the reason there was no material to show that the
appellant was aware of the sales effected by the respondents since 1996 for
the reason the sales were confined only in the State of Karnataka where the
respondent had made an entry in the year 1996. It was urged that the learned
Single Judge failed to appreciate the plea of the appellant that the whisky
sold by FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 4 of 16 the appellant under the
trade-mark „OFFICERS CHOICE‟ was popularly known as „OC‟ and that the
deception has to be considered keeping in mind a consumer at the whisky shop
or at a bar, who would presumably ask for „OC‟ whisky and could be misled by a
whisky bottle displaying the name „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟ as „OC‟ whisky. Learned
Senior Counsel further urged that the question whether deception can occur has
to be approached from the point of view of a man of average intelligence and
imperfect recollection. The overall structural and phonetic similarity of the
two names has to be kept in view with equal weightage to both facets i.e.
„structural‟ and „phonetic‟. Learned Senior Counsel urged that the bottles
used by the respondents were identical to those of the appellant. The label
having white background with printing in red colour; the cap being white with
print in red colour was the same in the two products i.e. that of the
appellant and the respondents. Since the trade channel was the same and class
of consumer was common, learned Senior Counsel urged that having not taken
into consideration all said factors, the learned Single Judge has acted with
material irregularity while exercising the equitable jurisdiction.

8\. Sh. Arun Jaitely learned Senior Counsel for the respondent urged that
admittedly, the appellant learnt about FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 5
of 16 the respondents product entering the market when the respondent applied
for approval of its label before marketing the product in the State of
Karnataka as per the requirement of Karnataka Excise (Bottling of Liquor)
Rules 1967. The appellant admittedly filed objections on 17.10.1995 before the
Commission of Excise Karnataka, inter alia, objecting as under:-

> "As you are aware, under an arrangement with Tracstar Investments Ltd.,
> Bangalore we have authorized them to bottle and sale one of our brands of
> Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) viz. Officer‟s Choice Prestige Whisky,
> among others. The aforesaid label of Officer‟s Choice Prestige Whisky has
> already been approved by you for Tracstar Investments Ltd. to manufacture
> and sale.

> We have come across a new brand of IMFL under the name and style of
> "ORIGINAL CHOICE PRESTIGE WHISKY" which has been introduced in Karnataka
> market by one National Distilleries & Allied Products, Panthrapalaya, Mysore
> Road, Bangalore - 560 039. This has been done with a clear intention of
> passing it off as our product Officer‟s Choice.

> It is a common practice in liquor trade to refer to popular brands in short
> by its initials, like OC for Officer‟s Choice. You will appreciate that the
> abbreviations for the new brand of "ORIGINAL CHOICE" is exactly the same as
> that of our brand "OFFICER‟S CHOICE".

> This apart, the colour combination and lettering style in the label of the
> infringing brand of "ORIGINAL CHOICE" is deceptively similar to that of our
> brand "Officer‟s Choice" both visually as well as phonetically. You will
> agree that it will create confusion in the market and will mislead the
> customers in general, if it is allowed to be sold side by side with our
> product Officer‟s Choice. This will cause immense damage to the long
> standing FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 6 of 16 reputation and
> goodwill of our renowned brand under reference "Officer‟s Choice".

9\. Drawing attention to a chart showing the comparative sales (in crates) it
was urged that till the first suit was filed in the year 2002, the respondent
constantly grew in the market and has continued to grow till date and has in
fact overtaken the sales effected by the appellant. Therefrom, Sh.Arun Jaitely
learned Senior Counsel sought to bring home the point that it was a clear case
of acquiescence disentitling the appellant to any interim relief who sat by
the side, watching the respondent spend money on expansion and marketing. The
comparative sale figures referred to by Sh. Arun Jaitely learned Senior
Counsel for the respondent are as under:-

    
    
    
    S.No. Year           Original     Original    Total          Officer
                         Choice-      choice    -                Choice
                         Whisky       Rum, Brandy 3 + 4          Sales
                                      Gin                        Figures
     1         2            3                          5
                                          4                        6
    1       1996-97 63,984            0             63,984       1305295
    
    2       1997-98 77,797            0             77,797       2054906
    
    3.      1998-99 169,137           0             169,137      2503766
    
    4.      1999-00 119,278           0             119,278      2814999
    
    5.      2000-01 131,850           0             131,850      3422899
    
    6.      2001-02 172,833           0             172,833      3522861
    
    7.      2002-03 416,083           0             416,083      3582305
    
    8.      2003-04 1,490,893         34,076        1,524,969 3434058
    
    FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008                              Page 7 of 16
     9.      2004-05 2,492,084             266,503          2,758,587 3289323
    
    10.     2005-06 3,420,021             445,310          3,865,331 3937777
    
    11.     2006-07 4,295,077             477,928          4,773,005 5085367
    
    12.     2007-08 7,528,763             226,441          7,755,204        ..
    
    
    

10\. It was further urged that the appellant has obtained registration of its
trademark with a disclaimer of the word „Choice‟ and hence could not
appropriate the said word to the exclusion of the others. Learned Senior
Counsel urged that in an action for passing off, in relation to a trade-mark
which consists of one or more than one words, normally the predominant focus
is on the prefix and not the suffix. With reference to the label and the
general get up of the bottles, it was urged that in the past the appellant was
using labels with a completely different design and as time passed by and the
respondent grew in the market, the appellant started trailing the labels of
the respondent. Sh.Arun Jaitely learned Senior Counsel referred to the
literature relied upon by the appellant which showed that due to some internal
management problem, the sale of the product of the appellant virtually
stagnated and that of the respondent grew by leaps and bounds. Sh.Arun Jaitely
pointed out that originally the appellant was selling its product in a
cylindrical bottle and the label had a distinct band in black colour at the
edges of the label. Right from the inception, the FAO (OS) No.347/2008 &
365/2008 Page 8 of 16 respondent was selling its product in flat bottles and
the label was always having a golden colour band along the edges of the label.
Whereas the appellant was originally not having the acronym „OC‟ on their
product, the respondent had the said letters as an acronym on its label and
that the same was written in an artistic form, more as a graphic
representation of a symbol and less as an acronym, evidenced by the fact that
the letter „C‟ was encapsuled in the letter „O‟. It was as if „O‟ was carrying
in its womb „C‟.

11\. It would be relevant to note that till an interim arrangement was worked
out on 17.9.2007, the appellant did not have any injunction against the
respondent with the result the respondent was selling its product in different
States. It appears that as the respondent was intending to penetrate the
market in North India an interim arrangement was worked out and disposal of
the suit was expedited. Parties have recorded their evidence, by and large,
but because of the two suits getting stayed the parties were compelled to
argue on the issue of an interim injunction as the foundation of the interim
arrangement i.e. the early disposal of the suits got shaken due to the suits
being stayed.

12\. A word on the exercise of power in appeal against interim orders passed
by learned Single Judges on the original FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page
9 of 16 side of the High Courts. Unless the mass of prima facie evidence and
the law compels the appellate Court to interfere with an interlocutory order
passed by the learned Single Judge exercising discretionary jurisdiction, the
appellate Court must respect the view taken by the learned Single Judge. As
long as the discretion has been exercised reasonably, fairly, objectively and
keeping in view the principles of exercise of discretion, the appellate Court
is not required to reconsider the material which was considered by the learned
Trial Judge to find out whether an alternative view was possible or whether
the alternative view was a better view.

13\. The grievance of the appellant was to the observations of the learned
Single Judge in para 18 of the impugned order wherein the learned Single Judge
has observed as under:-

> "Without commenting on the question as to whether the mark „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟
> is deceptively similar to the mark „OFFICER‟S CHOICE‟, as that is a question
> which will be gone into by the Court after the IPAB decision, a look at the
> label and bottle of the plaintiff on the one hand and the defendants on the
> other, does not give the impression that the defendants‟ bottle and label
> could be passed off as the plaintiff‟s bottle and label. It is not the
> minute details which have to be seen but the overall impression that is
> gained by looking at the two products. Taking a prima facie view in the
> matter, it does not appear to me as if the defendants‟ label and bottle
> could be passed off as that of the plaintiff‟s. Consequently, the very FAO
> (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 10 of 16 first element of
> misrepresentation, which is essential for an action of passing off, is,
> prima facie, missing."

14\. Sh.Sudhir Chandra, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant urged that on
the one hand the learned Single Judge has unequivocally expressed that he was
not commenting on the question whether the mark „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟ was
deceptively similar to the mark „OFFICERS CHOICE‟ but in the next breath has
gone into the issue of deceptive similarity in a very cryptic manner and has
returned a finding against the appellant.

15\. A re-reading of what has been expressed by the learned Single Judge
reveals that the learned Single Judge has eschewed a discussion whether the
mark „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟ was deceptively similar to the mark „OFFICERS CHOICE‟
in the context, presumably, of phonetic and/or structural similarity in the
two marks. But has prima facie evaluated the trade dress i.e. the bottles and
the labels in which the whisky is marketed by the appellant and the
respondents to decide whether prima facie, deception, which is an essential
ingredient in an action for passing off, existed or not. Thus, we find no
contradiction.

16\. Prima facie views have to be expressed with care and without a deep
analysis of the rival claims on merits for said adjudication has to await the
final trial. Final views have not to be expressed at the interim stage lest
parties are prejudiced at FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 11 of 16 the
trial. The learned Single Judge has taken care to speak the minimum because
the appeal filed by the appellant before the Intellectual Property Appellate
Tribunal challenging the registration of the trade-mark „ORIGINAL CHOICE‟ in
favour of the respondent is pending and the said tribunal could be prejudiced
if conclusive views were expressed by the learned Trial Judge. No doubt, as
observed by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as 1969 (2) SCC
727 Ruston & Hornsby Ltd. Vs. The Zamindara Engineering Co. different
questions arise for consideration in an action for infringement of a trademark
and an action for passing off but the test as to likelihood of confusion or
deception arising from similarity of marks is the same both in infringement
and passing off actions. In para 7 of the report it was observed that in an
action for infringement where the defendant‟s trademark is identical with the
plaintiff‟s mark, the Court will not inquire whether the infringement is such
as is likely to deceive or cause confusion. But where the alleged infringement
consists of using not the exact mark on the register, but something similar to
it, the test of infringement is the same as in an action for passing off.
Thus, since the learned Single Judge was considering the plea at the interim
stage relatable to an action for passing off, the learned Single Judge had to
deal with the question of deception. FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 12
of 16

17\. Even otherwise, a plea of acquiescence or delay in bringing the action,
set up as a defence, requires it to be considered whether the interest of the
public would be adversely affected if the plaintiff is not granted an interim
injunction on account of acquiescence or inordinate delay in bringing an
action. It was so held by this Court in the decision reported as 2007 (35) PTC
59 (DEL) Pfizer Products Inc. Vs. Rajesh Chopra & Ors.

18\. We need not note the plethora of authorities on the issue whether
acquiescence or an inordinate delay in bringing an action for injunction can
non-suit the plaintiff. We note the latest the pronouncement on the issue by
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court being the decision reported as 2008 AIR SCW 4560
Khoday India Ltd. Vs. Scotch Whisky Asson. & Ors. It has been categorically
held that where acquiescence is established or there is an inordinate delay in
bringing an action for infringement of a trade- mark or passing off, the
discretionary relief of injunction may be denied.

19\. The sales figure of the product of the respondent shows the growth of the
respondent in the market since 1996. That the appellant was aware that the
respondent had entered the market in the year 1995 stands established from the
opposition made by the appellant before the Excise FAO (OS) No.347/2008 &
365/2008 Page 13 of 16 Commissioner Karnataka. Thus, the view taken by the
learned Single Judge that there has been an inordinate delay in bringing the
action and hence no interim injunction to be granted cannot be faulted with.

20\. The prima facie evaluation of the label used by the appellant and the
respondent is akin to the evaluation of a trade dress. After all, when a
product is sold in a container, be it a pouch, a packet, a box or a bottle the
issue of deceptive similarity has to be considered with reference to the
overall get up of the container; of course the test of a reasonable or a
prudent person with imperfect memory relying upon his memory to recollect the
image of a product seen earlier and co-relating it to the product before him
while buying the product has to be duly taken note of.

21\. For the purposes of an interim relief we find considerable merit in the
plea of the respondent that the appellant has trailed the respondent qua the
get up of the label and the shape of the bottle used by the respondent since
inception. We find that the appellant has been changing the shape of the
bottle and the get up of its label.

22\. Law does not require to list out the similarities and the dis-
similarities by making a check list because the consumer FAO (OS) No.347/2008
& 365/2008 Page 14 of 16 is not expected to do so while buying a product. The
test is to have a glance at the two competing labels and as a reasonable and a
prudent person forming an opinion whether there is a chance of deception
and/or confusion. Inherent in this test is the cognitive faculties of a Judge
impromptu telling the judicial mind whether the imprints in the brain have
resulted in a confusion.

23\. Thus, we do not intend to go into the nitty gritties of the two competing
labels and hence we do not discuss in detail the arguments advanced by Sh.
Arun Jaitely learned senior counsel for the respondent who took pains to bring
out the distinctive features in the two labels, as our cognitive faculties did
not leave us confused persons, rendering us vulnerable to be deceived as
claimed by the appellant.

24\. Before concluding we may note that since the question of deception has to
be approached from the point of view of a consumer of average intelligence and
imperfect recollection i.e. an ordinary person, common sense which is nothing
but a cluster of life‟s experiences comes into play.

25\. For the reason a Judge may not have experienced the purchase of "Officers
Choice" or "Official Choice" or the purchase of a peg of "OC", we recite the
usual mantra. Nothing stated by us would be construed as an expression on the
merits FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 15 of 16 of the controversy. The
learned Single Judge who would ultimately decide the suit would obviously be
guided by the evidence of those who go to the market or sit in a bar to enjoy
a peg or two in the evening.

26\. We find no infirmity in the view taken by the learned Single Judge.

27\. The appeals are dismissed with costs.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

SUNIL GAUR, J.

SEPTEMBER 29, 2008 mm FAO (OS) No.347/2008 & 365/2008 Page 16 of 16

