

Delhi High Court

Sungro Seeds Ltd vs Sk Tripathi & Ors on 15 May, 2020

    
    
         *       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
    %                                              Date of decision: 15th May, 2020
    +        CS(OS) No.1163/2013, IA No.9631/2013 (u/O XXXIX R-1&2
             CPC), IA No.9632/2013 (u/O XXVI R-9 CPC), IA No.9633/20I3
             (u/O XXVI R-10A CPC), IA No.10077/2013 (for direction), IA
             No.14827/2013 (u/O VIII R-10 CPC), IA No.1402/2014 (u/O VIII
             R-1 CPC) & CCP No.64/2013
             SUNGRO SEEDS LTD                                    ..... Plaintiff
                         Through:              Mr. Sudhir Chandra, Sr. Adv. with
                                               Mr. Subhash Bhutona & Ms. Rhyea
                                               Malik, Advs.
                                        Versus
        DR. S.K. TRIPATHI & ORS.                   ..... Defendants
                       Through: Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Sr. Adv. with
                                 Mr. Abhishek Saket, Ms. Vijaya
                                 Singh & Mr. Rahul Dubey, Advs.
    CORAM:
    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
    IA No.10058/2013 (of the defendant no.3 under Order VII R-11 CPC).
    
    1.

The defendant no.3 Nuziveedu Seeds Private Limited seeks rejection of the
plaint.

2\. The plaintiff has instituted this suit, pleading (i) that the plaintiff is
in the business of research, production, processing, marketing and sale of
high quality hybrids and varietal seeds; (ii) that the defendant no.1 Dr. S.K.
Tripathi and defendant no.2 Mr. Akhalesh Shukla are ex-employees of the
plaintiff who have joined the employment of and are currently employed with
the defendant no.3, a competitor of the plaintiff; (iii) that the plaintiff,
to protect sensitive and confidential information relating to the product and
product development know-how, varieties, hybrids, parent-lines, breeding
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 1 of 36 strategies and associated know-how and trade
secrets developed by the plaintiff, requires its employees to, at the time of
joining the plaintiff company, enter into an employment agreement and
undertake not to disclose any such sensitive and confidential information to
any third party during the course of employment and at any time thereafter;
(iv) the plaintiff also mandates its employees to execute a Deed of Assignment
of all rights, title and interest to any and all intellectual property
developed by the employee or in the development of which the employee has
contributed, during the term of the employment with the plaintiff, to the
plaintiff; (v) similar contracts were executed by the defendants no.1&2 also;
(vi) that the defendants no.1&2 had access to the plaintiff's intellectual
property including trade secrets such as the parent lines of the plaintiff's
hybrids and seeds used for cultivation of the parent lines of the plaintiff's
hybrids, breeding strategies etc.; (vii) one of the hybrid varieties developed
by the plaintiff is the Cauliflower Hybrid no.SCFH-130 sold in the market
under the name 'Katreena', which was released for commercial sale in the year
2006; (viii) that the defendant no.1 joined the plaintiff's predecessor on 1st
January, 2001 as General Manager in Research Development Department and was
responsible for conducting all research and development activities in relation
to vegetable seeds of the plaintiff; (ix) that the defendant no.2 joined the
plaintiff's predecessor on 1st January, 2001 as a Senior Field Assistant and
was further designated as Technical Officer in the R&D Department; (x) the
defendant no.1 supervised research and development activities of the
plaintiff's hybrid seeds including the research relating to SCFH-130; (xi) the
defendant no.2 had access to the plaintiff's confidential and sensitive
information, data, breeding strategies and information for Cauliflower CS(OS)
No.1163/2013 Page 2 of 36 Hybrids including SCFH-130; (xii) that the defendant
no.1 left the services of the plaintiff on 5th April, 2008; (xiii) that the
defendant no.2 left the services of the plaintiff on 18th December, 2008;
(xiv) that the defendants no.1&2 are currently employed with the defendant
no.3; (xv) the defendants no.l&2, at the time of joining the services of the
plaintiff, had entered into employment agreement whereunder they had agreed to
keep confidential all matters relating to their job and employment with the
plaintiff and not to give to anyone any particulars or details of any of the
research, process or of administrative and/or organizational matter of
confidential nature to which they would come across during the course of their
employment with the plaintiff; (xvi) the defendants no.1&2 had also executed
Assignment Deeds as aforesaid; (xvii) the defendants no.1&2 had also submitted
representations to not disclose to any third party any information obtained by
them by virtue of nature of their duty with the plaintiff; (xviii) in the last
week of October, 2010, the plaintiff came across packets of hybrid cauliflower
seeds in the market which carried the photographs of the plaintiff's hybrid
cauliflower SCFH-130, being marketed under the name 'Riya' and claiming almost
identical characteristic features as that of the plaintiff's hybrid SCFH-130;
(xix) the tests got conducted by the plaintiff also disclosed that the seeds
of the defendant no.3 had 100% identical characteristic features as that of
the plaintiff's hybrid SCFH-130 variety; (xx) it cannot be co-incidence that
defendant no.3's 'Riya' has identical morphological traits and genetic traits
to the plaintiff's 'Katreena'; (xxi) had the defendant no.3 developed its own
parent line and hybrid, there would have been substantial difference between
the genetic as well as morphological make up; (xxii) the defendant no.3
knowingly misappropriated the trade secret parent lines of the plaintiff and
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 3 of 36 also acquired the confidential information
relating to breeding strategies, soil conditions for breeding impugned hybrid,
from defendants no.l&2; (xxiii) the defendants no.1&2 have violated their
employment agreement and representation to the plaintiff; and, (xxiv) that the
defendant no.3 has indulged in unfair competition by wrongfully exploiting the
plaintiff's valuable confidential information, trade secrets, copyright and
other intellectual property rights.

Accordingly, the reliefs (i) of permanent injunction restraining the
defendants no.1&2 from disclosing or using any confidential information of the
plaintiff including all parental materials etc., to the defendant no.3 or to
any other person; (ii) of permanent injunction restraining the defendant no.3
from disclosing or using the confidential information of the plaintiff derived
from the defendants no.1&2; and, (iii) of delivery directing the defendants to
deliver all the confidential information, data and parental materials of the
plaintiff pertaining to SCFH-130 or any other product etc. have been claimed
in the suit.

3\. The suit came up before this Court first on 31st May, 2013 when though no
ex parte ad interim relief sought granted and no Court Commissioner as sought
appointed but the defendants were directed to within three days of their
service deposit the parental line of 'Riya' before this Court in a sealed
state so that it could be tested or compared with that of the plaintiff.

4\. A compliance affidavit has been filed by the defendant no.3.

5\. Though the defendants have filed their separate written statements but
need to refer thereto is not felt as the application of the defendant no.3
under CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 4 of 36 Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (CPC) has to be considered on the basis of the averments in
the plaint alone.

6\. The defendant no.3, in its application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
has contended (i) that there is a statutory bar to the jurisdiction of the
Civil Courts in matters pertaining to intellectual property rights of
seeds/hybrids and parents thereof; (ii) reference in this regard is made to
Sections 89, 64 and 65 of the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers'
Rights Act, 2001 (PPVFR Act); (iii) that the applications of both plaintiffs
as well as defendant no.3, for registration of their respective plant variety,
are pending before the Registrar under the PPVFR Act and the issue of
breeder's rights are yet to be established; (iv) only the Registrar can decide
the breeder's rights; (v) unless a variety is registered and the breeder's
rights conferred, no action for infringement lies; vi) the suit has been filed
on the premise that the plaintiff owns the intellectual property rights i.e.
the breeder's rights in SCHF-130 and the parents SCF-100293 and SCF-110293;
and, (vii) the relief claimed in the plaint is on the basis of infringing
activities when there can be no claim for infringement under Section 28 of
PPVFR Act, till the date of registration.

7\. The plaintiff has filed its reply to the application, pleading (i) that
the cause of action for the present suit does not arise under the PPVFR Act;
(ii) that the plaintiff is not seeking to assert any statutory rights under
the PPVFR Act; (iii) the plaintiff has filed the present suit for violation by
the defendants of the plaintiff's common law rights such as breach of
confidence, breach of trust and breach of contract, the torts of conversion
and misappropriation of trade secrets; (iv) this cause of action is different
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 5 of 36 from the cause of action under the PPVFR Act;
(v) Section 89 of the PPVFR Act bars jurisdiction of Civil Court only in
respect of matters which the Authority or Registrar or Tribunal under the said
Act is empowered by or under the said Act to determine.

8\. The defendant no.3 has filed a rejoinder to the reply aforesaid,
contending (i) that PPVFR Act is complete code in itself and the plaintiff
cannot invoke the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts for seeking relief by
invoking common law rights; (ii) the Authorities under the PPVFR Act are still
in the process of examination of the applications for registrations and the
procedure for establishment of the right to registration is also prescribed in
the Act; any order passed by the Civil Court would amount to establishment of
rights in favour of the plaintiff, without even such rights being created
under the statute in favour of the plaintiff; (iii) that the plaintiff, till
the date of registration, has no rights; (iv) if the plaintiff is not claiming
any breeder's rights, then the varieties of SCHF-130 and the parents are
already in public domain; (v) PPVFR Act having been enacted for the purposes
of the rights, of breeders for protection of plant varieties, the common law
rights cannot be invoked; (vi) common law rights cannot be invoked once a
statute has been enacted for creation of statutory rights in a plant variety;
and, (vii) that the plaintiff for invoking common law rights also is assuming
that it has breeder's rights in SCHF-130 while only the application of the
plaintiff for claiming such breeder's rights has been made and is still
pending consideration.

9\. The counsels were heard on 7th November, 2016 and 2nd December, 2016 and
orders reserved. Though there has been undue delay in CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page
6 of 36 pronouncing this order, but neither counsel in the interregnum has
mentioned the matter and no further development if any, in facts, has been
informed.

10\. The sole ground for rejection sought of the plaint being of the bar of
jurisdiction of this Court, contained in PPVFR Act, I proceed to examine the
provisions thereof in the context of the present controversy.

11\. The Act, as per preamble thereof, was enacted to provide for the
establishment of an effective system for protection of plant varieties, the
rights of farmers and plant breeders and to encourage the development of new
varieties of plants. The same, in definition Section 2 thereof, (i) vide
Clause (za) defines "variety" as a plant grouping except micro-organism within
a single botanical taxon of the lowest known rank which can be defined by the
expression of the characteristics resulting from a given genotype of that
plant grouping and which can be distinguished from any other plant grouping by
expression of at least one of the said characteristics and which is suitable
to be propagated; (ii) vide Clause (c) defines "breeder" as a person who has
bred, evolved or developed any variety; (iii) vide Clause

(h) defines "essential characteristics" as meaning such heritable traits of a
plant variety which are determined by the expression of one or more genes that
contribute to the principal features, performance or value of the plant
variety; (iv) vide Clause (r) defines "propagating material" as a plant or its
component including an intended seed or seed which is capable of regeneration
into a plant; (v) vide Clause (x) defines "seed" as a living embryo capable of
regeneration and giving rise to a plant which is true to such type. Section 3
of the said Act provides for the establishment of a Protection of Plant
Varieties and Farmers' Right (PPVFR) Authority with CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 7
of 36 the functions prescribed in Section 8. Section 12 provides for
establishment of a Plant Varieties Registry at the head office of PPVFR
Authority, for the purpose of facilitating the registration of plant varieties
and empowers the PPVFR Authority to appoint the Registrar General of Plant
Varieties. Section 13 provides for maintenance of a National Register of Plant
Varieties at the head office of the Plant Varieties Registry, for entering the
names of all the registered plant varieties, with the names and addresses of
their respective breeders. Section 14 of the PPVFR Act enables making of an
application by any person claiming to be the breeder of a plant variety or to
be successor or assignee of the breeder of the plant variety, to the Registrar
of Plant Varieties, for registration of any plant variety. Section 15 lays
down the criteria / tests to be satisfied for registration of a plant variety.
Suffice it is to state that a variety which conforms to the criteria of
novelty, distinctiveness, uniformity and stability is registrable. Section 21
provides for advertisement of the application for registration and
consideration of objections thereto. Section 24 provides for issuance of a
certificate for registration and Section 28 provides that a certificate of
registration shall confer an exclusive right on the breeder or his successor
or agent or licensee, to produce, sell, market, distribute, import or export
the variety. Section 30 however provides that nothing contained in the Act
shall prevent the use of any variety registered under the Act for conducting
experiments or research or as an initial source of variety for the purpose of
creating other varieties. Section 42 protects innocent infringement and
Section 47 empowers PPVFR Authority to grant compulsory licence of any plant
variety registered with it. Section 54 provides for the establishment of a
Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal, to hear and decide appeals
against the order or decision CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 8 of 36 of PPVFR
Authority or Plant Variety Registrar, relating to registration of a variety.
Section 64 provides that a right established under the Act is infringed by a
person, who not being a breeder of a variety registered under the Act, sells,
exports, imports or produces any such variety without the permission of the
breeder or uses sells, exports, imports or produces any other variety giving
such variety the denomination identical with or deceptively similar to the
denomination of a variety registered under the Act, in such manner as to cause
confusion in the minds of general people, in identifying such variety so
registered. Section 65 provides that no suit for infringement of variety
registered under the Act or relating to any right in a variety registered
under the Act shall be instituted in any Court inferior to a District Court
having jurisdiction to try the suit. Section 89 bars the jurisdiction of Civil
Court in respect of any matter which PPVFR Authority or Plant Variety
Registrar or Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or
under the Act to determine and Section 92 gives the provisions of the Act an
overriding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any other law for the time being in force.

12\. A reading of the PPVFR Act would show the structure thereof to be similar
to that of Trade Marks Act, 1999 enacted for registration and protection of
trade mark, Copyright Act, 1957 enacted for registration and protection of
copyright, Patents Act, 1970 enacted to provide for registration and
protection of patents and Designs Act, 2000 enacted for registration and
protection of designs. Just like the said Acts provide the term for which
registration is granted and during which term only rights conferred thereunder
can be protected/enforced and whereafter patent and design are in public
domain, so also the PPVFR Act vide Section 24(6) thereof lays down CS(OS)
No.1163/2013 Page 9 of 36 that the registration of a variety granted
thereunder is for nine years in the case of trees and vines, extendable to a
maximum of eighteen years, from the date of registration, and six years in the
case of other crops, extendable for a maximum of 15 years from the date of
registration. The rights conferred by the PPVFR Act, on the breeder of a plant
variety, are thus a facet of intellectual property and fall in the same domain
as trade marks, copyright, patents and design.

13\. In the interregnum between the date when this order was reserved and
today, there have been several pronouncement of this Court with respect to
PPVFR Act and one of which may be mentioned. This Court in CS(COMM)
No.132/2016 titled Mosanto Technology LLC Vs. Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd. was
concerned with a claim for infringement of a patent in transgenic plants
having insecticidal capabilities. One of the contentions of the defendant
therein while opposing the application of the plaintiff therein for interim
relief was that the patent was invalid as the rights claimed by the plaintiff
therein could only be under the PPVFR Act and whereunder no registration had
been obtained. Though the learned Single Judge while deciding the application
for interim relief recorded that the said issue was purely legal and the suit
itself could be decided on hearing thereon, but for the reason of the parties
not coming forward to accept the said procedure, refrained from doing so. Vide
judgment reported as Mosanto Technology LLC Vs. Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd. 239
(2017) DLT 599, while dismissing the application of the plaintiff therein for
interim relief, giving some directions, it was observed that the invention
subject matter of that suit patent was prima facie not the same as development
of a variety within the meaning of PPVFR Act. The Division Bench of this Court
however, vide judgment reported as CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 10 of 36 Nuziveedu
Seeds Ltd. Vs. Monsanto Technology LLC 2018 SCC OnLine Del 8326 (DB), in
appeals by both the parties, held in favour of the defendant in the suit and
held that since the invention was non patentable, being the subject matter of
PPVFR Act and whereunder no registration existed, the suit was not
maintainable and there was no need to put the same to trial; resultantly, the
suit was dismissed. Supreme Court however in judgment reported as Monsanto
Technology LLC Vs. Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd. (2019) 3 SCC 381 set aside the order
of the Division Bench and restored the suit and the order of the Single Judge,
leaving the question whether the invention subject matter of that proceeding
was in the domain of the Patents Act or in the domain of PPVFR Act also to be
decided post trial.

14\. We here are not concerned with the controversy as had arisen in Mosanto
Technology LLC supra. The plaintiff Sungro Seeds Ltd. herein is not claiming
any patent and is claiming rights pending registration under the PPVFR Act.
The reference hereinabove to Mosanto Technology LLC supra is only to bring the
matter to context.

15\. I had during the hearing enquired from the senior counsel for the
plaintiff, whether 'Katreena' of the plaintiff and 'Riya' of the defendant
no.3, registration of both of which was claimed to have been applied for by
the respective parties and informed to be pending consideration, were
permitted to be sold in the open market, even without such registration and
whether any other law/rule/regulation required any permission to be obtained
for selling a plant variety claimed to be new.

16\. It was informed by the senior counsel for the defendant no.3 that
'Katreena' of the plaintiff and 'Riya' of the defendant no.3 are result of
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 11 of 36 hybridisation claimed by the respective
party and sale of new varieties created by hybridisation does not require any
permission and both plaintiff and the defendant no.3 are commercially
exploiting their respective creations.

17\. The senior counsel for the plaintiff did not controvert the aforesaid
position. It was further informed that only if the new variety is a result of
genetic modification does it require permission for sale.

18\. The position which thus emerges is, that a plant variety claimed to be
new and capable of registration, if not the outcome of "genetic modification",
can be sold/commercially exploited even while its registration is pending.

19\. I wondered, how a breeder of a new plant variety, which in accordance
with law has already been placed in public domain by marketing thereof, can be
left remediless against the person who, taking advantage of the fact that
registration takes time, violates the rights of the breeder.

20\. As mentioned above, the statutes with respect to trade mark, copyright,
patent and design, also provide for registration. The said Statutes also do
not provide for rights between the time, the trade mark is coined or the work
in which copyright is claimed is created or the date of the invention or the
date of conception of design, on the one hand, and the date when registration
applied, is granted. However the need therefor in the case of trade marks and
copyright and perhaps also in the case of designs does not arise, because (a)
in case of trade marks, even prior to registration, common law rights exist;
(b) in case of copyright, registration is not mandatory for assertion and
enforcement of rights; and, (c) in case of designs, prior to the CS(OS)
No.1163/2013 Page 12 of 36 date of registration, rights as a trade mark or as
a copyright may be claimed. However, in the case of Patents, a question may
arise, whether an inventor has any remedy against a person who commences
commercially exploiting an invention, between the dates of invention and the
date of grant of patent. To my knowledge, there is no case law in this respect
and the counsels also, inspite of the said question arising during the
hearing, did not cite any judgment.

21\. The Legislature however while enacting the PPVFR Act, perhaps to fill up
the aforesaid lacuna in the Patents Act, empowered the Registrar of Plant
Varieties vide Sub-Section (5) of Section 24 of the PPVFR Act, to issue any
directions to protect the interest of a breeder against any abusive act
committed by any third party during the period between filing of application
for registration and decision taken by the Registrar on such application. I
may also notice that per Section 24(2) of the PPVFR Act, the maximum time
within which the Registrar of Plant Varieties is to decide the application for
registration, from the date of filing of the application, is to be prescribed
by the Rules thereunder and vide Section 24(3) of the PPVFR Act, such time is
to be not later than twelve months from the date of application, if the
applicant is in default and thereafter the application for registration is to
be treated as abandoned. In spite of so limiting the time taken in
registration, it was deemed fit by the legislature to, vide Section 24(5) of
the PPVFR Act, empower the Registrar of Plant Varieties to protect rights of a
breeder in the interregnum.

22\. The senior counsel for the defendant no.3 contended, (i) that PPVFR Act
is a complete code in itself; (ii) that there is no common law right in a
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 13 of 36 new plant variety; (iii) PPVFR Act creates
rights against infringement, only on grant of registration; (iv) PPVFR Act
does not vest any rights in the breeder prior to registration; (v) that it
being the plea of the plaintiff that, the defendants no.1&2 had stolen the
parent line of SCFH-130 and had given it to the defendant no.3, and that
'Riya' of the defendant no.3 being identical to 'Katreena', of the plaintiff,
both cannot be registered and which question is pending consideration before
the Registrar of Plant Varieties and against whose order provision has been
made in PPVFR Act for an appeal to Plant Varieties Protection Appellate
Tribunal; (vi) for the period prior to registration also, power has been
vested in the Registrar of Plant Varieties, vide Section 24(5), to grant the
relief as has been claimed by the plaintiff in this suit; and, (vii) the PPVFR
Act expressly bars the jurisdiction of this Court in respect of any matter
which the PPVFR Authority or the Registrar of Plant Varieties or the Plant
Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under the Act to
determine; reference is particularly made to Sections 89 and 24(5).

23\. The senior counsel for the defendant no.3, during the hearing also
referred to (i) Dhulabhai Vs. State of M.P. AIR 1969 SC 78, (ii) Emergent
Genetics India Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Shailendra Shivam 2011 (47) PTC 494 (Del); and
handed over copies of (iii) Mohan Lal Vs. Sona Paint (2013) 200 DLT 322 (FB);
and, (iv) Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds Co. Ltd. Vs. Union of India (2012) 191 DLT
129.

24\. Per contra the senior counsel for the plaintiff contended that the
plaintiff has sued on breach of contract and confidentiality by the defendants
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 14 of 36 no.1 &2, without invoking the PPVFR Act and
is in the suit not claiming or asserting any rights under the PPVFR Act.

25\. The senior counsel for the defendants responded that such a claim would
lie against the defendants no.1&2 only and not against the defendant no.3.

26\. It was further the contention of the senior counsel for the plaintiff
that neither the PPVFR Authority nor Plant Variety Registrar nor Plant
Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal have the jurisdiction to decide the
issues as raised in this suit, of breach of contract. Reliance was placed on:

> (i) The Premier Automobiles Ltd. Vs. Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke of Bombay
> (1976) 1 SCC 496 where it was held that (a) if a dispute is not an
> industrial dispute nor does it relate to enforcement of any right under the
> Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the remedy lies only in the Civil Court; (b)
> if the dispute is an industrial dispute arising out of a right or liability
> under the general or common law and not under the Act, the jurisdiction of
> the civil Court is alternative, leaving it to the election of the suitor
> concerned to choose his remedy for the relief which is competent to be
> granted; (c) only if the industrial dispute relates to the enforcement of a
> right or an obligation created under the Act, then the only remedy available
> to the suitor is to get an adjudication under the Act;

> (ii) Abhinav Gupta Vs. JCB India Ltd. 2010 (119) DRJ 397 (DB) where it was
> held that if a particular relief or cause of action is barred under the
> Information Technology Act, 2000, it would CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 15 of 36
> not mean that the plaint as a whole has to be rejected inasmuch as the
> plaint contains various causes of action and reliefs and if on trial it
> emerges that certain relief can be granted only under the Information
> Technology Act, then such relief may be denied and the suit may be dismissed
> to that extent but at the preliminary stage when issues even had not been
> framed, the plaint could not be rejected;

> (iii) Dhulabhai supra, laying down that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court
> is all embracing except to the extent it is excluded by an express provision
> of law or by clear intendment arising from such law and that where a
> liability was existing at common law, and that liability is affirmed by a
> statute which gives a special and peculiar form of remedy different from the
> remedy which existed at common law, unless the statute contains words which
> expressly or by necessary implication exclude the common law remedy, the
> party suing has his election to pursue either of the two remedies;

> (iv) The Mumbai Kamagar Sabha Bombay VS. M/s. Abdulbhai Faizullabhai AIR
> 1976 SC 1455 where, finding that though the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965
> speaks as a whole code on the subject of profit-based bonus but is silent on
> other distinct and different kinds of bonus such as the one oriented by
> custom, it was held that the Bonus Act could not annihilate by implication
> such different kinds of bonus;

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 16 of 36

> (v) Zee Tele.films Ltd. Vs. Sundial Communications Pvt. Ltd.

> 2003 (27) PTC 457 (Bom) (DB) holding that an obligation of confidence may
> exist where there is no contractual relationship and that it is in public
> interest that confidences should be respected;

> (vi) P. Asokan Vs. Western India Plywoods Ltd. Cannanore AIR 1987 Kerala 103
> (FB) where a suit against the employer for compensation for injuries
> sustained by employer's negligence was held maintainable as the claim was
> not based on any provision of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948;

> (vii) Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. Vs. T.M.

> Nagarajan (1988) 15 DRJ 212 holding Section 18 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926
> to be not a bar to the jurisdiction of a Civil Court to grant injunction
> against strikes, demonstration and picketing etc. by workers;

> (viii) Belganda Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. Vs. Keshav Rajaram Patil 1994
> SCC OnLine Bom 317 holding that Section 91(1) of the Maharashtra Co-
> operative Societies Act, 1960 was not a bar to a jurisdiction of a Civil
> Court to entertain a dispute arising between society and a member about a
> matter which does not arise out of the provisions contained in the Act and
> that the Act was only intended to consolidate and amend the law relating to
> Co-operative Societies and not for the purpose of regulating all the
> transactions;

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 17 of 36

> (ix) Raja Ram Kumar Bhargava Vs. Union of India (1988) 1 SCC 681 holding
> that wherever a right, not pre-existing in common law, is created by a
> statute and that statute itself provided a machinery for the enforcement of
> the right, both the right and the remedy having been created uno flatu and a
> finality having been intended to the result of the statutory proceeding, in
> the absence of an exclusionary provision, the civil courts' jurisdiction is
> impliedly barred; however if a right pre-existing in common-law is
> recognised by the statute and a new statutory remedy for its enforcement,
> without express exclusion of the civil courts' jurisdiction does not bar the
> civil court from entertaining the dispute; and,

> (x) Dwarka Prasad Agarwal Vs. Ramesh Chandra Agarwala AIR 2003 SC 2696 to
> contend that bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court is not to be readily
> inferred.

27\. During the hearing, it was felt that the relief seeking which the suit
had been filed was within the domain of Registrar of Plant Varieties in
exercise of powers under Section 24(5) of the PPVFR Act and the jurisdiction
of this Court thus was barred under Section 89 thereof. It was also felt that
since registration as a plant variety has been sought by the defendant no. 3
and because commercial exploitation of the seed in which the plaintiff claims
exclusive right is also, by the defendant no.3, the effective relief of
injunction claimed in the suit is against defendant no.3 only and on the basis
of claim of the plaintiff of breach of contract and breach of trust and
confidentiality against the defendants no.1 and 2, would CS(OS) No.1163/2013
Page 18 of 36 still not entitle the plaintiff to relief against defendant
no.3. It was thus felt that the suit was not entertainable by this Court and
the plaint liable to be rejected, at least insofar as against defendant no.3,
reliefs sought whereagainst could be obtained by the plaintiff before
Registrar of Plant Varieties.

28\. However the Division Bench of this Court in Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd. Vs.
Registrar of Plant Varieties 2016 SCC OnLine Del 6236 was concerned with a
challenge to the vires of the said Section 24(5) of the PPVFR Act inter alia
on the ground that the same empowered the Registrar to injunct another, even
before the applicant for registration had acquired any proprietary rights in
the plant variety of which registration was sought. It was the contention
therein that it was well nigh possible that the application for registration
is ultimately rejected; however the third party would stand restrained in the
meanwhile . It was further the contention that Section 24(5) of the PPVFR Act
was capable of immeasurable harm and likely injury by a competitor, who by
making a mere application for registration and grant of interim measure under
Section 24(5), may succeed in destroying a genuinely developed plant variety
whose creator or originator might be preparing a claim. Several other
arguments were also raised. The Division Bench, vide the judgment aforesaid,
found merit in the challenge and has struck down Section 24(5) of the PPVFR
Act, so empowering the Registrar of Plant Varieties, inter alia reasoning (i)
that the process of registration begins with the submission of an application
but the grant of registration or dismissal of the application for registration
is after enquiry, as prescribed in the Act; (ii) however the power under
Section 24(5) of the PPVFR Act is exercisable at any stage and even at the
moment the application is filed, regardless of its CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 19
of 36 merits i.e. whether the applicant has any right or not; (iii) "unlike in
the case of all other species of property rights, real or intellectual, the
protection granted is not only wide but in respect of an entirely inchoate
claim. In a sense, the assertion by the application is at least inchoate till
it was ruled or was a mere claim based upon unverified and unsubstantiated
particulars in terms of the Act and the Rules"; (iv) "infringement is a matter
to be determined by regular Courts"; and, (v) "given the importance of the
Act, there is enormous danger in empowering authorities with unguided and
uncanalized power through provisions that can implicate livelihoods and limit
or impair food access to tens of thousands-potentially hundreds of thousands
of farmers and users of plant variety".

29\. Though an appeal to the Supreme Court against Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd.
supra is pending and there is interim stay of operation of the judgement but
with the striking down of Section 24(5) of the PPVFR Act, it appeared that the
fulcrum of the argument of the senior counsel for the defendant no.3 to the
jurisdiction of this Court to entertain the suit had disappeared and there
being no other provision in the PPVFR Act empowering any of the authorities
created thereunder to grant relief at the pre-registration stage, this Court
would have jurisdiction. With respect to the contention of the senior counsel
for defendant no.3, of the exclusive jurisdiction to determine similarity
between the seeds of plaintiff and defendant no.3 being of the authorities
under the Act, it appeared that this Court may have jurisdiction till the said
authorities decided the applications for registration.

30\. However, even if it were to be so, the question which still arises for
consideration herein is, whether there can be any rights as a breeder as are
CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 20 of 36 conferred by the PPVFR Act on grant of
registration as a variety thereunder, before such registration is granted.
While the plaintiff herein claims such rights as common law rights, the
defendant no.3 herein controverts the existence of any such rights under the
common law.

31\. Though during the hearing what perturbed me was, the commercial
exploitation of a plant variety by a person who is not the breeder thereof but
who may have come across such variety, before the breeder thereof has obtained
registration of the same under the PPVFR Act, and the breeder being remediless
till then, but on further consideration find that it is not as if the breeder
would be remediless. The breeder, once has been granted registration, in an
action for infringement can always claim profits earned by such infringer for
the pre-registration period as well.

32\. Else, the position with respect to plant variety and the rights as a
breeder is the same as with respect to copyright, designs and patents i.e. the
said rights are statutory rights pure and simple, created for the first time
vide and under the legislation with respect to each, and which did not exist
under the common law. Reference in this respect, in relation to (i) Copyright,
may be made to Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. Vs. Super Cassette
Industries Ltd. (2008) 13 SCC 30, Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. Vs.
RPG Netcom 140 (2007) DLT 758 (DB), The Gramophone Company of India Ltd. Vs.
Super Cassette Industries Ltd. 1998 SCC OnLine Del 929, Super Cassettes
Industries Ltd. Vs. Chintamani Rao 2011 SCC OnLine Del 4712, Akuate Internet
Services Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Star India Pvt. Ltd. 2013 SCC OnLine Del 3344,
Navigators Logistics Ltd. Vs. Kashif Qureshi 254 (2018) DLT 307 and Satish
Kumar Vs. Khushboo Singh CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 21 of 36 MANU/DE/3411/2019;
(ii) Designs, may be made to Smithkline Beecham Consumer Healthcare GMBH Vs.
G.D. Rathore 2002 SCC OnLine Del 52 and CROCS Inc. USA Vs. Aqualite India Ltd.
2019 SCC OnLine Del 7409; and, (iii) Patents, may be made to Novartis AG Vs.
Union of India (2013) 6 SCC 1, Claudio De Simone Vs. Actial Farmaceutica SRL
2020 SCC OnLine Del 476, and Bristol-Myers Squibb Holdings Ireland Unlimited
Company Vs. Natco Pharma (2020) 266 DLT 724.

33\. If as per the legislations with respect to intellectual property of
patent and design, there is no right till the grant of registration, the
question of the plaintiff herein, till the grant of registration under the
PPVFR Act having any right, upon violation whereof any cause of action would
accrue to the plaintiff, does not arise. Seen in this light, this suit filed
prior to registration under the PPVFR Act is without any cause of action.

34\. It is perhaps for this reason only that the senior counsel for the
plaintiff pegged his case on breach of agreement/undertaking and
confidentiality code by the defendants no.1and 2 to the plaintiff by virtue of
employment.

35\. I have however wondered that if the plaintiff, till the date the
defendants no.1 and 2 were in employment of the plaintiff, had no rights in
any work / development of variety carried out, whether confidentiality with
respect thereto can be claimed. In my view, confidentiality and secrecy
obligations can only be with respect to a right which the person is entitled
to protect. What the plaintiff did not have any right in, the plaintiff could
not have protected by entering into agreements with the defendants no.1 and 2
with respect thereto.

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 22 of 36

36\. I have, since reserving this order, had an occasion to deal with the said
aspects also in Navigators Logistics Ltd. and Claudio De Simone supra.

37\. In Navigators Logistics Ltd. supra, finding that confidentiality and
secrecy was claimed in the same works in which copyright was claimed, it was
held that once the claim for copyright stood negated, there could be no claim
for the same right by pleading confidentiality and secrecy and the same would
amount to creating a new right. It was inter alia held:

> "40...... Copyright was also claimed in the same list and which has not been
> found. What troubled me was that the law having not protected such a list as
> a copyright, what could be right in law of the plaintiff to enforce
> confidentiality thereof. I then came across the article titled "The 'Other
> IP Right': Is It Time to Codify the Indian Law on Protection of Confidential
> Information" authored by Mr. Prashant Reddy T, Assistant Professor, NALSAR,
> Hyderabad published in Journal of National Law University, Delhi 5(1)1-21,
> analysing the law with respect to confidential information and authoring (i)
> Article 39 of the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
> (TRIPS) Agreement signed by India imposed an obligation on contracting
> states to provide means to protect secret information that has commercial
> value from disclosure without the consent of the persons who have maintained
> the secrecy of such information; (ii) however India did not enact any new
> laws on the issue of trade secret protection meaning that Indian government
> considered its existing laws sufficient to comply with the requirements of
> Article 39;

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 23 of 36

> (iii) confidential information under English law is protected under both
> common law and equity with remedies of injunction and damages; (iv) however
> English law does not equate information to property unlike some other
> jurisdictions, such as the United States where trade secrets are treated as
> property; (v) India's approach to confidential information has been the same
> as that of English Courts; (vi) Indian Courts, even in the absence of a
> contract have protected information received under a duty of confidence;
> reference is made to John Richard Brady Vs. Chemical Process Equipments Pvt.
> Ltd. AIR 1987 Del. 372; and, (vii) English Courts have implied a duty of
> fidelity into the arrangement between an employer and employee."

In the same judgment with respect to the claim under the head of "breach of
employment contract", referring to Section 27 of the Contract Act, 1872, it
was held:

> "53. A two Judge Bench of the Supreme Court, as far back as in Niranjan
> Shankar Golikari Vs. Century Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. AIR 1967 SC
> 1098 was concerned with a suit for injunction to restrain the employee, who
> had agreed to serve the employer for a fixed period, from during the said
> period, even after ceasing to be the employee of the plaintiff, joining
> employment of a competitor of the plaintiff. It was unanimously held that
> considerations against restrictive covenants are different in cases where
> the restriction is to apply during the period after the termination of the
> contract, than those in cases where it is to CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 24 of
> 36 operate during the period of contract of employment. In the facts of that
> case, it was found that the employee was privy to the special process
> invented / adopted by the plaintiff and of which the employee was trained
> and had acquired knowledge. The employee who had left employment prior to
> the contracted period was thus restrained from joining employment of a
> competitor for the remaining period for which he had contracted with the
> plaintiff in that case.

> 54\. A three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Superintendence Company of
> India (P) Ltd. Vs. Krishan Murgai 1981 2 SCC 246 was concerned with a claim
> for injunction post cessation of employment. It was held by two of the
> Judges on an interpretation of the restrictive clause in the Employment
> Contract, that the same was to apply only when the employee on his / her
> volition left the employment and not when the employer terminated the
> employment. The third Hon'ble Judge held that even if the restrictive
> covenant was to include cessation of employment at the volition of the
> employee, there could be no post-employment restriction under Section 27 of
> the Act.

> 55\. A subsequent two Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Percept D'Mark
> (India) (P) Ltd. Vs. Zaheer Khan (2006) 4 SCC 227 refused enforcement of a
> post-employment restriction on the ground of same being barred by Section 27
> of the Act.

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 25 of 36

> 56\. Applying the aforesaid law to the facts of the present case, it is
> found that as per the plaintiff also, there was no fixed term for which
> either of the defendants no.1 to 8 had agreed to serve the plaintiff. The
> clause in the Employment Contract claimed by the plaintiff also is to the
> effect that defendants no.1 to 8, for a period of one year after ceasing to
> be the employee of the plaintiff, to not compete with the plaintiff. Such a
> clause in the Employment Contract, as per the judgments aforesaid of the
> Supreme Court, is void under Section 27 of the Contract Act. Once the clause
> is void, there can be no injunction or damages in lieu of injunction on the
> basis thereof.

> 57\. The permanent injunction and in the alternative damages claimed on the
> premise of non-compete clause thus discloses no cause of action and is not
> required to be put to trial."

38\. In Claudio De Simone supra, dealing with a case of passing off and unjust
enrichment without claiming any patent rights, it was held (i) unlike the
intellectual property of trade mark, where the common law tort was statutorily
recognized vide Section 27(2) of the Trademarks Act, there is no common law
right in an invention as the plaintiffs therein claimed De Simone Formulation
to be; it is only by statute i.e. the Patents Act, that to give impetus to
research and innovation, rights in an invention are conferred but again unlike
trade mark, for a limited period of time; (ii) it is only when a patent has
been obtained with respect to an invention, in accordance with the Patents
Act, that the inventor or the patentee is entitled to prevent others from
making using or selling the patented product; there is no right in CS(OS)
No.1163/2013 Page 26 of 36 common law in any inventor to restrain others from
commercially exploiting the invention; (iii) Placing reliance on Akuate
Internet Services Pvt. Ltd. supra, where in the context of a claim for
injunction restraining the defendants from disseminating contemporaneous match
information in the form of ball by ball account or minute to minute score
updates/match alerts, for a premium and without obtaining licence from
plaintiff and dealing with the argument of the defendant therein unfairly
competing with the plaintiff, it was held:

> "10. The plaint, in my view, does not disclose any cause of action against
> any of the defendants on the ground of passing off their goods as that of
> the plaintiffs. My reasons therefor are as follows:
    
    
           A.      .............
           B.      .............
           C.      .............
           D.      In Akutate Internet Services supra, in the context of a
           claim      for   injunction   restraining   the   defendants   from
    

> disseminating contemporaneous match information in the form of ball by ball
> account or minute to minute score updates/match alerts, for a premium and
> without obtaining licence from plaintiff, the argument of defendants
> unfairly competing with the plaintiffs was rejected holding (i) that in
> doing so, the Courts would be granting protection to certain intangibles not
> covered by the specific statutory regimes; (ii) the basic economic rule is
> that competition is not only lawful but a mainspring of the CS(OS)
> No.1163/2013 Page 27 of 36 economy; (iii) the legislature has recognized
> that there should be exceptions-it has laid down the rules for these; the
> laws of patents, trademarks, copyrights and designs have all been fashioned
> for the purpose; each of them have rules for their existence... each has
> their own justification; (iv) it is not for the judges to step in and
> legislate into existence new categories of intellectual property; (v) it is
> not open for the Courts to create such judicial remedies to remedy what the
> Courts consider unfair; it is not open to the Court to legislate in this
> way; (vi) recognition of a general action for "unfair competition" involves
> not more than recognition of the fact that the existence of such an action
> is inconsistent with the established limits of the traditional and statutory
> causes of action which are available to a trader in respect of damage caused
> or threatened by a competitor; those limits, which define the boundary
> between the area of legal or equitable restraint and protection and the area
> of untrammelled competition, increasingly reflect what the Parliament has
> determined to be the appropriate balance between competing claims and
> policies; (vii) neither legal principle nor social utility requires or
> warrants the obliteration of that boundary by the importation of cause of
> action whose main characteristic is the scope it allows, under high-sounding
> generalizations for judicial indulgence of idiosyncratic notions of what is
> fair in the market place; (viii) the recent trend internationally to accord
> protection to rights in information in varying degrees or to accept the
> doctrine of unfair competition, especially in the European Union, CS(OS)
> No.1163/2013 Page 28 of 36 is pursuant to legislative action by the European
> Council, and not as a judicial extension; (ix) once we recognize that mere
> information cannot be the subject matter of protection under common law, it
> becomes apparent that other means continue to remain available to protect
> such information: by way of an action for breach of the common law duty of
> confidence, which is a right in personam against an individual who has come
> across such information under confidence, and crucially, is distinct from a
> propriety right in such information itself, opposable in rem; (x) there
> exists another cogent reason for denying the existence of any general
> misappropriation or unfair competition theory - i.e. that it would create a
> non-existent distinction between copying which is actionable under the
> Copyright Act and appropriation or misappropriation which is actionable
> under the doctrine of unfair competition; (xi) under the Copyright Act, the
> copying or reproduction of match information is permitted; to say that the
> doctrine of unfair competition prohibits the misappropriation of match
> information would either mean that misappropriation under common law can
> supplant the Copyright Act or that copying and misappropriation refer to two
> distinct acts, which would be a distinction without a difference; (xii)
> claims based on alternate common law remedies in respect of what is in the
> domain of a statute cannot be permitted; and, (xiii) claim on the basis of
> unjust enrichment is the same as a claim on basis of the doctrine of unfair
> competition."

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 29 of 36

> It was further held:

> "G. The question thus, of the plaintiffs having any rights with respect to
> De Simone Formulation or right of preventing the defendants from claiming
> their product to be the same as De Simone Formulation in which the
> plaintiffs have no right, does not arise.

> H. The counsel for the plaintiffs, being well conscious of the aforesaid
> legal position has cleverly contended that though the defendants, if had
> discovered invention in De Simone Formulation on their own or by way of
> reverse engineering, could not have been restrained by the plaintiffs from
> marketing and selling De Simone Formulation, but because entered into an
> agreement with the plaintiffs for the plaintiffs to provide Know- How of De
> Simone Formulation, after knowing the Know-How from the plaintiffs cannot
> indulge in making and marketing the product as De Simone Formulation.

> I. The aforesaid argument overlooks that the De Simone Formulation has no
> patent in India and the plaintiff no.1, even as inventor thereof under the
> Patents Act, has no right to restrain the defendants from making or selling
> De Simone Formulation. The question which thus emerges is, whether an
> invention which does not qualify as patented product and has no property
> right therein, can acquire property rights by the third person entering into
> an agreement of exchange of Know-How and thus claiming confidentiality. In
> my opinion, no. Reference in this regard may be made to Navigators Logistics
> supra wherein I have held that CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 30 of 36
> confidential information and trade secrets are not equated to property in
> India.

> J. The said Know-How, without patent being applied for with respect thereto,
> was in public domain and by conduct of the defendants the status thereof
> cannot be changed and the same cannot be conferred rights as are permitted
> to be conferred under the statute i.e. Patents Act, only in accordance with
> the provisions thereof. The plaintiffs' case is not of enforcement of
> contractual rights.

> K. The counsel for the plaintiffs, as recorded in the order dated 2nd
> December, 2019, has also sought to contend that a patent is different from
> Know-How. However, Section 7 of the Patents Act titled "Form of Application"
> requires every patent application to be accompanied with a provisional or
> complete specification and Section 10 of the Act titled "Contents of
> Specifications" requires the specification to describe the invention
> sufficiently indicate in the title the subject matter to which the invention
> relates and to fully and particularly describe the invention and its
> operation or use and the method by which it is to be performed, the best
> method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for
> which he is entitled to claim protection, to define the scope of the
> invention for which the protection is claimed, and provide technical
> information on the invention in the abstract. The position becomes clear
> from Section 25 of the Patents Act, which permits the grant of patent to be
> opposed on the ground of the complete specification CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page
> 31 of 36 furnished not sufficiently and clearly describing the invention or
> the method by which it is to be performed. Section 84 of the Act titled
> "Compulsory Licences", empowering the Controller of Patents to grant
> compulsory licence of patent enabling a person other than a patentee or
> others whom patentee has permitted to work the patent, is also indicative of
> patent, particularly the specifications therein, being self-sufficient to
> enable such person to work the patent even without the consent of the
> patentee. If the Know-How for manufacture of a product for which the patent
> has been obtained and which patent has lapsed was not proved in the
> specifications required to be furnished for obtaining a patent, no
> compulsory licence with respect to the said patent could have been granted
> inasmuch as compulsory licence would have been unable to work the patent
> without also knowing the other knowhow which the plaintiff no.1 claims to
> have kept to himself. L. In any case, information claimed to be confidential
> can be protected as trade secret only if such information is not available
> in the public domain and is hence unknown to others. Reference in this
> regard may again be made to Navigator Logistics supra, Ambience India Vs.
> Naveen Jain 122 (2005) DLT 421, Emergent Genetics Vs. Shailendra Shivam 2011
> (125) DRJ 173, Tech Plus Media Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Jyoti Janda MANU/DE/2438/2014
> and Satish Kumar supra. Since the plaintiffs have no subsisting patent
> protection in India, and since the patent based in US has expired, the
> innovation, as noted above, is in public domain. Hence, the claim for trade
> secret CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 32 of 36 protection falls and the defendants
> cannot be restrained from manufacturing the product, in spite of the Know-
> How Agreement, as otherwise it would amount to judicial creation of an
> extra- statutory monopoly for perpetuity in the invention, in contrast to
> the scheme of Patent Act, 1970 that seeks to bring an invention to public
> domain after the expiry of the term of the patent, and which is opposed to
> public interest as well as to judicial discipline."

39\. Mention may also be made of my recent judgment in Modicare Ltd. Vs.
Gautam Bali 2019 SCC OnLine Del 10511 holding that (i) Section 27 of the
Contract Act makes void i.e. unenforceable, every agreement by which anyone is
restrained from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind;
(ii) it is incongruous that the law, on the one hand would disable a plaintiff
from enforcing a contract where the defendant had voluntarily agreed not to do
something, by going to the extent of declaring such contract void, but on the
other hand, enable the same plaintiff to the same relief under the law of
tort; to hold so, would make the law look like an ass; (iii) Section 27 has
been held to have been enacted as a matter of public policy of India, and does
not create any personal right, which can be waived; if it is the public policy
of India that there can be no restraint on any one exercising a lawful
profession, trade or business, not even when such person has voluntarily
agreed not to, it belies logic that such public policy would not apply when
the mischief sought to be prevented is sought to be practiced invoking law of
torts; (iv) what is not contractually enforceable is also not enforceable
invoking law of torts; (v) while under the common law in CS(OS) No.1163/2013
Page 33 of 36 England, restraints of trade, whether general or partial, may be
good if they are reasonable or reasonably necessary with reference to public
policy or for protection of interest of covenantee, in India, agreements in
restraint of trade are governed by Section 27 and the question of
reasonableness of restraint is outside the purview of Section 27--this
explains, the law of tort of unlawful interference in business, in UK; (vi)
however the same has no place in India;

(vii) principles of English Law cannot be imported once the Parliament has
codified the said principles in the Contract Act; it is the language of the
statute which alone has to be considered to ascertain its true meaning and
scope; (viii) Section 27, on promulgation of the Constitution of India,
conferring the right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation,
trade or business, the status of a Fundamental Right, under Article 19(1)(g)
thereof, today has a different connotation; (ix) Article 19(6) only clarifies
that nothing contained in Clause (g) shall affect the operation of any
existing law or prevent the State from making any law, imposing in the
interest of general public, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of right
conferred by the said clause; (x) thus, restrictions, in the interest of
general public and if reasonable, to the Fundamental Right to practice any
profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business, can be imposed
only by law; (xi) the law of tort of unreasonable interference in carrying on
business, in view of Section 27 of the Contract Act, was not the existing law
within the meaning of Article 19 (6) of the Constitution; (xii) the right
saved by Section 27 is a facet of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.

40\. In view of having dealt with the subject recently in judgments aforesaid,
the need to say anything more is not felt; however though Emergent Genetics
India Pvt. Ltd. supra has already been dealt with in my CS(OS) No.1163/2013
Page 34 of 36 earlier judgment but the senior counsel for the defendants also
drew attention to certain passages which have relevance particularly to this
dispute. It was held therein that the Courts are enjoined to interpret the law
and the Constitution, keeping in view the Directive Principle of State Policy
embodied in Part-IV of the Constitution of India; if the Courts were to
accept, without any statutory regime, the plaintiffs' blanket assumption that
it is possessed of confidential information in something, which plainly, is
part of the material resource of the community, the Court would overstep the
mandate of the Constitution, in its anxiety to protect such a perceived right.

41\. What follows is that the plaintiff, prior to obtaining registration under
the PPVFR Act, cannot maintain a suit to restrain the defendants from
infringing the rights which are yet to be conferred on the plaintiff on grant
of registration. The matter in my view is also covered by the dicta of the
Division bench of this Court in Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd. supra though I must
reiterate that appeal thereagainst is pending in the Supreme Court. Just like
therein it was held that the rights of the applicant for registration as a
plant variety are inchoate and not crystallized till grant of registration and
the Registrar of Plant Varieties is not entitled to, pending registration,
restrain another from commercially exploiting the plant variety, registration
of which is sought, so will this Court as the Civil Court be not entitled to
protect the claimed rights till crystallized by way of registration. The other
reasoning given in the said judgment of, the same if permitted resulting in
another being restrained though the application for registration may be
ultimately dismissed, also holds good here.

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 35 of 36

42\. Resultantly, the plaintiff is not found to be having any rights,
asserting which the suit was filed and the suit is dismissed.

43\. However, the subject being at a nascent stage, I refrain from imposing
costs.

Decree sheet be prepared.

RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.

MAY 15, 2020 'pp/gsr'..

CS(OS) No.1163/2013 Page 36 of 36

