

Calcutta High Court

Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd. vs Governor-General In Council. on 9 April, 1943

Equivalent citations: 1943 11 ITR 393 Cal

JUDGMENT DERBYSHIRE, C.J. - This matter originally came before McNair, J., who
referred it to the Chief Justice, under rule 3 of Chapter V of the Original
Side Rules which is as follows :-

"Where it shall appear to any judge at any stage of a suit, application or
other matter, that it involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935, or any order in council
made thereunder, he shall report to that effect to the Chief Justice, who
shall constitute a Bench of two or more judges to hear the suit, application
or other matter."

Put shortly the plaintiffs claim that certain provisions of the Indian Income-
tax Act of 1922 as amended by the Income-tax Act of 1939 are beyond the law
making powers of the Indian central Legislature and that in consequence
certain money they have paid under protest to the Government of India as
income tax under the protest to the Government of India as income tax under
the said provision was not legally payable by them; they claim a declaration
that the said provision are ultra vires and ask for a return of the money so
paid and other reliefs.

The defendants in their written statement have pleaded Section 226 of the
Government of India Act, 1935, which in its material part provides :-

"No High Court shall have any original jurisdiction in any matter concerning
the revenue, or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof
according to the usage and practice of the country of the law for the time
being in force."

In order to decide whether and to what extent this plea will avail the
defendants it is necessary to go into the facts of the case and the relevant
provision of the law. There is no difference between the parties as to the
facts.

The Governor-General in Council as representing the Government of India is a
party to the suit and has appeared through Sir Asoka Roy, the Advocate-General
of Bengal, not acting as the Advocate General of Bengal, but as Counsel
representing the Government of India; we were informed by Sir Asoka Roy that
it was not necessary to give special notice to the Government of India or the
Advocate-General of India under Order XXVII-A of the Code of Civil Procedure
as they were aware of the case and were represented by him.

The suit is brought by the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd., a joint stock company
incorporated under the English Companies Act, having its registered office at
13, Athol Street, Douglas, in the Isle of Man and its main office at Egham,
Surrey, England. We are informed from the Bar that the reason for the Companys
registration in the Isle of Man was to save registration fees. For all
practical purposes it is an English Company. It has no business premises in
India, but holds the bulk of the shares in a number of companies which carry
on the business of manufacturing and selling tobacco and cigarettes in India.
These companies are as follows : (1) The Imperial tobacco Company of India
Ltd; and (2) Carriers (India) Ltd. The two above companies which are referred
to as "the rupee companies" are incorporation in India under the Indian
Companies Act and have their registered offices and business headquarters at
37, Chowringhee, Calcutta, within the original jurisdiction of this Court. (3)
The Arcadian Tobacco Co., Ltd.; (4) The Cigarette Manufactures (India) Ltd.;
(5) Dominion Tobacco Co., Ltd.; (6) General Advertising Agency (India) Ltd.;
(7) Indian Leaf Tobacco Development Co., Ltd.; (8) Peninsular Tobacco Co.,
Ltd.; (9) Printers (India) Ltd.; (10) Thomas bear and Sons (India) Ltd.; and
(11) Tobacco Manufacturers (India) Ltd.

The Companies Nos. 3 to 11 inclusive are companies under the English Companies
acts and are referred to as "the sterling companies."

A statement was put in by the plaintiffs which is agreed by the defendants to
be correct and it is as follows :

"The nine sterling companies are controlled in London where the Boards of
Directors sit, the share registers are situate, and dividends are declared.
The boards in London have constituted local boards which are situate in India.
The business in India, where all profits are made, is managed by the local
boards. The ultimate control lies with the London boards. No share registers
are kept in India. The financial policy of the companies is controlled by the
London boards, and in all important matters of business the London boards are
consulted. All the the general meetings of the companies are held in England.
The registered offices of six of the sterling companies are in the Isle of Man
and of three others in London, but all the sterling companies have officer in
London."

Copies of Articles 97, 98 and 100 of the Memorandum of Association of the
Tobacco Manufacturers (India) Ltd., are exhibited separately. It is agreed
that each of the other sterling companies contains similar Articles. These are
marked Exhibit B.

All the companies above concerned, with the exception of the plaintiffs, have
carried on business in India and made profits here which have been assessed to
income tax and super tax under the Indian Income tax laws and those taxes have
been paid. Dividends have been declared after payment of Indian Income-tax and
super tax by the 11 companies, and the plaintiffs have received such dividends
as they are entitled to on their share holdings in those eleven companies.
Dividends on the two rupee-companies were paid to a representative of the
plaintiff company at 37, Chowringhee, Calcutta. The dividends of the nine
sterling companies were declared by them in England and paid by them in
England to the plaintiff company in England.

On June 6, 1939, the Income-tax Officer, Companies District III, 3, Government
Place West, Calcutta (which is within the jurisdiction of the Original Side of
this Court) sent to the plaintiffs a notice under Section 22(2) and 38 of the
India Income-tax Act of 1922, as follows :

"1. In pursuance of the provisions of Section 22(2) of the Indian Income tax
Act, 1922, you are hereby required to prepare a true and correct statement of
the companys total income and total world income during the previous years in
the attached form (along with such other particulars as are required to
complete the form) and to deliver it to me at may office duly signed by you on
behalf of the company on or before 12-7-1939 (or within 30 days of the reciept
of the notice should the former dte be less than 30 days after the receipt of
the notice).

2\. The form contains the instructions required for the preparation of the
return. If you desire any further information, you should apply to this
office.

A separate form for making this return is annexed."

That notice was addressed to the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd., at 37,
Chowringhee, Calcutta. The plaintiffs have no business premises in India, but
the notice was forwarded by some one at 37, Chowringhee to the plaintiff in
England who made a return signed by their Secretary on August 18, 1939, giving
their address as "Westminster House, 7 Millbank, London SW.I." That return
apparently was sent by the plaintiffs from London to 37, Chowringhee,
Calcutta, from which address it was forwarded on August 25, 1939, to the same
Income-tax officer by one A. S. McAra with the fooling covering letter.

"Dear Sir, At the request of the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd. I pass on to you
herewith their return under Section 22 in respect of the income-tax year
1939-40."

On September 11, 1939, the same Income-tax officer wrote to the plaintiffs at
37, Chowringhee, a letter with regard to the assessment for 1939-40 asking to
be furnished with certificate under Sections 20 in respect of dividends
received during the year ending March 31, 1939. There was further
correspondence in which on each occasion the Income-tax officer addressed the
plaintiff at 37, Chowringhee, Calcutta, and eventually obtained replies
through replies through 37, Chowringhee, Calcutta.

On April 3, 1940, the Income-tax Officer wrote a letter to the plaintiffs -
C/o Messrs. Imperial Tobacco Co., of India Ltd., 37, Chowringhee, Calcutta.
Paragraph 6 of this letter is as follows :-

"You are further requested to let me know that in view of Explanation (3) to
Section 4(1) of the Act, the dividends shown in Section D of the return being
income accruing or arising in British India and thus liable to be included in
total income, it appears that the total income accruing or arising in British
India exceed the income arising without British India in the previous year and
as such in terms of Section 4A[c] the company is to be treated as resident in
British India and as such the entire profits are liable to be taxed."

(the letter is reproduced as put in evidence, the wording is faulty.)
Paragraph 7 as follows :-

"You are requested to let me know if you have anything to urge against this."

On June 3, 1940, the plaintiffs replied from Rusham House, Egham, Surrey, to
which address they had apparently removed from Millbank, London, as follows :

"Dear Sir, Your letter of the April 3, addressed to this company, care of the
Imperial Tobacco company of India, Limited, Calcutta has been forward to us."

The Company contends that dividends declared outside British India are not
income accruing or arising in British India on the following grounds :

(a) Explanation (3) to Section 4(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, as
amended by the Indian Income tax Amendment Act, 1939 on its true construction
refers to dividends declared within British India but paid outside British
India, and not to dividends declared outside British India.

(b) Alternatively, if on its true construction the said Explanation refers to
dividends declared outside British India the Explanation is ultra vires the
Central Indian Legislature which is not empowered under the Government of
India Act, 1935, to income a tax on persons not resident in British India in
respect of income which does not arise in British India. Dividends declared
outside British India are debts arising outside British India.

If follows that the company cannot be treated as resident in British India as
the dividends shown in section C of the Return are not income accruing or
arising in British India and cannot be deemed so to accrue or arise, and in
consequence, the income to the company arising in British India (shown in
Section A of the return) does not exceed its income arising outside British
India.

The above deals with paragraphs 1, 2, 6 and 7 of your letter. As regards
paragraph 3, I would confirm that Vazir Sultan Tobacco Company and London and
Burma Tobacco Company Ltd., are not assessed to tax British India.

In reply to paragraph 4 of your letter, the direct profits represent income
other than dividends which arose from business carried on out side British
India.

Copies of certificates where income tax has been deducted from dividends shown
in Section C of the Return asked for under paragraph 5 of your letter, are
enclosed herewith, together with profit and loss account requested to be
furnished under paragraph 8.

Nothing arises under paragraph 9 as this company has no representative in
India."

The contention in paragraph 6 of the letter of the Income-tax officer dated
April 3, 1940, that "the total income accruing or arising in British India
exceeds the income arising without British India in the previous year and as
such in terms of Section 4-A (c) the company is to be treated as resident in
British India and as such the entire profits are liable to be taxed" has since
been dropped.

It is convenient here to set out Section 4(1)(c) of the Act and Explanation
(3) which were added to the Indian Income-tax act of 1922 by the Indian
Income-tax (Amendment) Act of 1939 :

"4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the total income of any
previous year of any person includes all income, profits and gains from
whatever source derived which -

(c) if such person is not resident in British India during such year, accrue
or arise or are deemed to accrue or arise to him in British India during such
year."

Explanation is as follows :-

"A dividend paid without British India shall be deemed to be income accruing
and arising in British India to the extent to which it has been paid out of
profits subjected to income tax in British India."

At this time communications between India and England had become more
difficult.

On August 2, 1940, the Income-tax officer sent another notice under Section 22
of the Income-tax Act to the plaintiffs, and on August 3, Mr. Hamilton, an
Accountant of the Imperial Tobacco company of India, Ltd., at 37, Chowringhee
informed the Income-tax Officer of the difficulty in getting a reply from the
Raleigh Investment Company, Ltd., and asked for an extension of time up till
October 31, 1940.

On August 6, the Income-tax replied to the Accountant extending the time for
the submission of the return to November 4, 1940.

On September 13, the plaintiffs from England wrote to the Income- tax officer
direct adding another plea of ultra vires.

On October 15, the plaintiffs wrote from England direct to the Income-tax
Officer, who received the letter on December 17, furnishing further returns in
respect of Printers (India) Ltd.

On December 23, 1940, the Income-tax Officer made an assessment upon the
plaintiffs of Rs. 72,047/- in respect of income-tax and Rs. 3,73,155 - 13 - 0
in respect of super-tax. These assessments were as follows : "The Raleigh
Investment Company, Ltd., received the following dividends -

From Imperial Tobacco Co., of India, Ltd.

on 30-9-38 Net.

Rs.

Gross. Rs.

Co., of India, Ltd.

& 29-3-29 11,58,000 13,57,086 Carreras [India] Ltd.

In Sep. 39 and March 39 1,25,000 " 1,46,490 15,03,576."

(The net amounts referred to are net amounts of dividend paid by the rupee
companies to the plaintiffs after deducting the income tax and super tax which
the two rupee companies had paid on their profits : the gross amount is the
amount of the net together with the income-tax and super tax paid by each
rupee company added back. The dividends paid by the sterling companies to the
plaintiffs amounted to 3,86,648 - 19 - 7 Pounds equivalent to Rs. 51,55,307/-.
The income-tax and super tax already paid by these companies on their profits
in India was Rs. 8,86,314/-. This was added to the Rs. 51,55,307/- giving a
total for Indian Income-tax purposes of dividend received from the sterling-
companies of Rs. 60,41,621/-. There was therefore a grand total for purposes
of assessment of Rs. 75,45,197/-.) Upon that the plaintiffs were assessed as
follows :

Rs.

Rs.

Rs.

"Total Income Rs.

75,45,197 Income-tax @ 30 pies 11,78,937 Tax paid 8,86,314 2,20,576 11,06,890
72,047 Super tax @ 12 pies 4,71,574 13 Deduct under Sec. 18(3) On 5-5-39
45,943 19-4-93 5,951 2 3,967 7 42,557 9 98,419 2 3,73,165 13 Total demand
4,48,201 13 On the same day a copy of this assessment was sent by the Income-
tax officer together with a notice of demand under Section 29 of the Indian
Income-tax Act to the plaintiffs at 37, Chowringhee Calcutta. On January 2,
1941, Mr. McAra writing as a director of the Imperial Tobacco Company of India
wrote back to the Income-tax officer stating at follows :-

"Dear Sir, On Friday or Saturday last week delivery of a cover addressed to
the Releigh Investment Co., Ltd., 37, Chowringhee, Calcutta, from your office
was incorrect accepted here.

You have already been advised that the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd., have no
place of business nor any representative in this country, and you were
informed of the address to which correspondence should be sent.

We have, on this occasion and without accepting any responsibility as to the
ultimate delivery, re-addressed and air-mailed the cover to England; but if
the contents called for an urgent replay of laid down a time limit within
which some action should be performed, we would remind you that there is very
considerable delay in the transmission of mails between this country and the
United Kingdom."

On February 19, the plaintiff company from England telegraphed to the Income-
tax Officer, Calcutta, intimating to him that they would appeal against the
assessment and on February 21, the Income-tax Officer replied by telegram :
"appeal accepted if posted March 19. Arrange payment by March 15." On February
24, 1941, the Income-tax officer wrote to the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd., in
England as follows :-

"With reference to your cable dated February 19, 1941, I have the honor to
enclose herewith a copy of computation of assessment for 1938-40 with the
request to pay up the demand as early as possible."

That was received by the plaintiffs on May 13, 1941. On February 28, the
plaintiffs from London cabled the Income-tax Officer as follows : "Your cable
22nd requiring payment by March 15. Are you prepared to exercise discretion
under Section 45. Treat assessee as not in default whilst appeal indisposed
of."

On March 5, the Income-tax Officer cabled to the plaintiffs in England in
reply : "Your cable 28. Sorry cannot exercise discretion under Section 45.
Arrange payment by March 15."

On or about March 12, 1941, the plaintiffs under protest remitted to the
Income tax authorities in Calcutta by telegraphic transfer from England the
amount of the assessment and demand, viz., Rs. 4,45,202-13-0. The plaintiffs
said that they paid the sum under protest in order to avoid penalties and
other proceedings that might be taken against them as an assessee in default
under the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act.

There are various provisions in Section 46 of the Indian Income-tax Act under
which the Income-tax authorities in India might have caused to be attached
either the plaintiffs share in the rupee companies or the dividends payable to
the plaintiffs on these shares. Doubtless the plaintiffs were afraid there
might be such attachment unless they paid and of course they were minded to
appeal against assessment. Such an appeal, dated March 11, 1941, when received
in India was actually lodged by a Mr. Ryan, a solicitor of 37, Chowringhee on
or about June 4, 1941. In the grounds of appeal the plaintiffs letters of June
3 and September 13, 1940, which had been before the Income-tax Officer when he
made the assessment. The Income-tax Officer, as the assessment shows, rejected
paragraph (a) of the plaintiffs objections in the letter of June 3. He did not
deal with the question of ultra vires.

On August 21, 1941, Mr. Ryan wrote to the Appellate Assistant commissioner of
Income-tax as follows :-

"In view of certain constitutional questions which are raised by some of the
Grounds of Appeal in this case, the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd., has been
advised to take other proceedings to have those questions determined. What
form those proceedings should take is now under consideration.

In the meantime, the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd., does not wish to abandon
its rights under the Act respecting the assessment on the constitutional
question or on the other grounds raised. In the circumstances, I request that
you would be good enough to allow the appeal to remain in abeyance by
adjourning it sine die until such time as the Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd.,
been [Sic] able to decided upon its other course of action."

On November 11, 1941, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner wrote to Mr. Ryan
as follows :-

"The request in your letter 21-8-41 is unusual and your proposed proceedings
relating to the constitutional issues cannot arise under the Indian Income tax
Act under certain provisions of which in am to here and decided the appeal.
The procedure under this act has to be followed. If is decide against you, you
may go to the Appellate Tribunal against whose order, if advised, you may ask
for a Reference to the High Court. I do not propose therefore to keep the
appeal in abeyance as you suggest and request you to let me know when Mr.
Isaacs will be available in case you want him to appear at all.

On hearing from you I shall try to fix an early date but I am so heavily
booked ahead for a long time that I cannot at this stage foresee the date. As
Saturdays are High Court holidays, may not a Saturday, if possible this month,
suit you and Mr. Isaacs ?"

On November 17, 1941, Mr. Ryan wrote back that Mr. Isaacs was busy and that he
was awaiting instructions from England on the question of the appropriate
procedure to be adopted by the assesses. He appealed to the Appellate
Assistant commissioner not to fix a date for the hearing of the Appeal before
the middle of January.

The Appellate Assistant Commissioner replied by giving a notice on November 27
fixing January 17, 1942, for the hearing and final disposal of the appeal.

On December 16, 1941, the plaintiffs gave a written notice to the Secretary to
the Central Board of Revenue of the Government of India, New Delhi, setting
out the facts and stating that they intended upon the expiration of two months
from that date they intended upon the expiration of two months from that date
to file a suit in the High Court at Calcutta, against the Governor General in
Council claiming the reliefs which have now been claimed. This notice was
given pursuant to Section 8 of the code of Civil Procedure. On January 16,
1942, Mr. Ryan on behalf of the plaintiffs gave notice to the Appellate
Assistant commissioner in Calcutta that he did not propose to proceed with the
appeal against the assessment under the Income-tax Act.

Under the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act there is an appeal from the
assessment by an Income tax officer to the Appellate Assistant Income tax
Commissioner under Section 30 of the Act, and from him to an Appellate
Tribunal consists of two members, one of whom was judicial experience and is
generally an ex District Judge whilst the other is an Accountant. The
Appellate Tribunal may state a case for the opinion of the High court
functions with regard to such case stated are to advice on the law and from
its judgment or opinion there is an appeals to the Privy Council.

On April 17, the plaintiffs began the present proceedings in this court
claiming :

(1) a declaration that in so far as explanation 3 and the other provisions of
Section 4 of the Indian Income-tax Act purport to authorize the assessment and
charging to tax of a non resident company in respect of dividends which have
been declared and or paid outside British India upon shares situate outside
British India but which have never been brought into British India, the said
provisions are ultra vires the legislative powers of the Central India
Legislature and that therefore the plaintiff company is not liable to be
assessed or charged to income tax or super tax in respect of the said
assessment for the year 1938-40 was illegal and wrongful :

(2) an injunction restraining the defendant, his officers, servants or agents
from making any further assessment upon the plaintiff company in any
subsequent years in respect of dividends of sterling companies declared and
paid outside British India and not brought into British India;

(3) repayment of the said total sum of Rs. 4,35,290-5-0 as income- tax and
super-tax illegally levied and/or as money paid under coercion or duress
and/or as money had and received by the defendant to the use of the plaintiff
company;

(4) interest upon the said sum of Rs. 57,689/- and Rs. 3,73,155-13-0 (portions
of the said total sum of Rs. 4,35,290-5-0) under the Interest Act at the rate
of 12 per centum per annum as from the December 22, 1941 until judgment, and
further interest from the date of judgment until payment upon the whole of the
said sum of Rs. 4,35,290-5-0 at the rate of 6 per centum per annum or such
other rate as may be allowed by this Court; and (5) such further or other
relief as the Court shall deem just.

Referring back to the assessment it will be noticed that the plaintiffs claim
the return of Rs. 57,689/- instead of Rs. 72,047/- and Rs. 4,35,290-5-0/-
instead of Rs. 4,45,202-13-0 paid. The reason for this is that the plaintiffs
do not question the right of the Government to tax they in respect of the
rupee-companies dividends which the plaintiffs received in India. We are,
therefore, not concerned in this case with the question of taxation of the
dividends received from the rupee-companies. The sum of Rs. 57,689/- arises in
this way : the dividends received by the plaintiffs from the two rupee-
companies and the sterling companies were taxed to income-tax under Finance
Act of 1938 at the rate of twenty six pies per rupee and the total of the
income tax paid by the rupee companies amounted to Rs. 11,06,890/-. The
Government have taxed the plaintiffs in respect of the same amount of income
when received by them at the rate of thirty pies per rupee under the Finance
Act of 1939. This income-tax amounted to Rs. 11,78,937/-. Section 49B of the
Income-tax Act provides :

"Where a shareholder has received a dividend from a company which has paid
income tax imposed in British India or elsewhere, he shall be deemed, in
respect of such dividend, himself to have paid the income tax [exclusive of
super tax paid by the company on so much of the dividend as bears to the whole
the same proportion as the amount of income on which the company has paid such
income tax bears to the whole income of the company."

There is no similar provision in respect of super tax which is a flat rate tax
payable by companies as well as individuals. The consequence is that the
income tax authorities gave the plaintiffs credit for the income tax paid by
the two rupee and nine sterling companies, viz., Rs. 11,06,890/- against the
income tax demanded of the Raleigh Investment Company Ltd., viz., Rs.
11,78,939/-. The difference is Rs. 72,047/- which is a part of the money the
plaintiffs paid. Of that amount of tax a certain proportion is attributable to
the dividend received from the rupee companies about which there is now no
dispute. The proportionate amount attributable to the sterling companies is
Rs. 57,689/-.

As regards the item of Rs. 3,73,155-13-0 this is super tax paid by the
plaintiffs in respect of the income received by them from the rupee companies
(Rs. 15,03,576/-) and the sterling companies (Rs. 60,41,621/-) in all (Rs.
75,45,197/-). Each of the rupee companies and the sterling companies had
already paid super tax on their respective profits at the flat rate before
before they paid their dividends to the plaintiffs.

Section 18(3-D) of the Income-tax Act provides that an Income-tax officer, it
he has reason to believe that a non resident shareholder would be liable to
super-tax, may direct the principal officer of the company to deduct super-tax
at the time of the payment of the dividend. Further under Section 18(3-E) it
is the duty of such principal officer, even if he receives no direction to
deduct super tax from the dividend payable to a non resident share holder, if
the amount of such dividend payable is found to have reached the limit at
which super tax begins to be chargeable.

The rupee companies made this deduction before paying their dividends to the
plaintiffs. The rate of super tax in 1938 when the deduction was made was
thirteen pies in the rupee. The rate of super tax in 1939 when the plaintiffs
submitted to payment of super-tax on their dividends from the rupee companies
was only twelve pies in the rupee. The result is that the plaintiffs were over
charged and made overpayment to the extent of Rs. 4,455-10-0. Credit is given
for this in the assessment. As regards the sterling companies, although they
were paying super tax on their own profits in India, they did not before
declaring their dividends make any deduction under Section 18(3-D) and Section
16(3-E). The result is that the plaintiffs have been assessed on their income
from the sterling companies (Rs. 60,41,621/-) to super tax for the year 1939
to the amount of Rs. 3,77,601-5-0. Hence the net assessment of the plaintiff
company for super-tax for the year 1939 was Rs. 3,77,601-5-0 less the credit
from the rupee-companies over-deduction of super-tax Rs. 4,455-10-0, that is,
Rs. 3,73,155-13-0. All the profits and gains of the sterling companies in
India had already been fully assessed and taxed to super-tax in India before
the plaintiffs received their dividends from those profits. The defendants
have taxed the plaintiffs and the plaintiffs have paid in all Rs. 57,689/- as
income-tax together with Rs. 3,73,155-13-0 as super-tax under the defendants
assessment and demand, and their claim is to recover it. On the profits of the
sterling companies on which taxes are levied, the proper taxes in India have
been paid by the sterling companies before the dividends were declared by the
sterling companies.

As this case may well go to other Courts which may wish to have details of
these taxes explained to them I asked the Income-tax authorities who were
present in Court to be good enough to prepare a table with necessary
explanations to show, how the taxes have been arrived at. The table and the
explanations are exhibited and marked Exhibit 1.

The written statement put in by the defendant admits in paragraph 2 that the
dividends of the sterling companies were declared, paid and received in
England and that the plaintiffs were assessed on such a basis. In paragraph 3
the defendant pleads that -

"The plaintiff company is the principal shareholder in all the rupee companies
as well as the sterling companies referred to in paragraph 2 of the plaint. As
such the plaintiff company controls the business and trade of all the said
companies in British India. In any event the plaintiff company has sufficient
interest in the capital and assets of the said companies employed in British
India and in the trading operations of the said companies in British India to
make it liable to Indian Income-tax in respect of income arising out of such
trading operations."

This pleas has not been developed, but is I believe disposed of hereafter in
this judgment. The defendant denies that the sums paid by the plaintiffs were
paid under any coercion or duress. He also denies that provisions of
Explanation 3 to Section 4(1) of the Indian Income-tax Act are ultra vires of
the legislative powers of the Central Indian Legislature as defined by the
Government of India Act, 1935.

Lastly, in paragraph 11 of the written statement there is this plea :

"The plaintiff company has no cause of action. In any event the defendant will
object and contend that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain this suit
by virtue of Section 226 of the Government of India Act."

Section 226 of the Government of India Act provides :

"(1) Until otherwise provided by Act of the appropriate legislature, no High
Court shall have any original jurisdiction in any matter concerning the
revenue, or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof
according to the usage and practice of the country or the law for the time
being in force.

(2) A Bill or amendment for making such provision as aforesaid shall not be
introduced into or moved in a Chamber of the Federal or a Provincial
Legislature without the previous sanction of the Governor-General in his
discretion or, as the case may be, of the Governor in his discretion."

Defendants Counsel in this case has argued very strenuously, under instruction
of his client through the Central Board of Revenue, that Section 226 of the
Government of India Act precluded us from entertaining this suit in any form.
This attitude is strange in view of the fact that in two cases which
intimately concerned the revenue the plea was apparently not raised. I refer
to the case of the Vacuum Oil Co. v. The Secretary of State for India in
Council reported in I.L.R. 56 Bom. 313 and the case of the Ford Motor Company
of India Ltd. v. The Secretary of State for India in Council reported in L.R.
65 I.A. 32.

In each of these cases the plaintiffs under protest paid duty levied by the
Customs Authorities at Bombay under the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and then
brought proceedings in the High Court at Bombay to recover amounts of money
which they claimed were illegally levied as duty upon their goods. In each
case the suit was brought against the Secretary of State, who stood in the
same position as the Governor-General does in this case, on the Original Side
of the High Court in Bombay. The Vacuum Oil Company was successful in the
Court of first instance, unsuccessful in the Appellate Court at Bombay and
successful in the Privy Council. In the other case the Ford Motor Company were
substantially unsuccessful in the Court of first instance and also an appeal
to the Bombay High Court and in the Privy Council.

There is no evidence of any plea of Section 226 of the Government of India
Act, 1935, or its predecessor Section 106(2) of the Government of India Act,
1915, being raised although Sea Customs Duty is just as much revenue as
income-tax. However, the matter must be decided according to law.

This particular section, except where it provide for its repeal, substantially
re-enacts Section 8 of the Act of Settlement, 1781. This Section was enacted
to prevent the Supreme Court in Calcutta from interfering with the East India
Companys collection of land revenue. It has been retained in successive
enactments and, in particulars, Section 106(2) of the Government of India Act,
1915.

It will be noticed that it is only the exercise of the original jurisdiction
of the High Court that is forbidden. The exercise of the appellate
jurisdiction of the High Court is not forbidden. Had the offices of the
Income-tax Officer been two miles south of where they are now and so outside
the ordinary original jurisdiction of this Court (which extends only to the
limited part of Calcutta which is bounded by the Circular Road and the river
Hooghly but contains the business part) the present proceedings would have
been started before a Sub-ordinate Judge in the Alipore Court which is in
greater Calcutta and come to this Court to be dealt with on appeal without
Section 226 being pleadable.

Both the plaintiffs solicitors office and the Income-tax Office where the
money was paid are within the ordinary original jurisdiction of this Court.

Some very severe strictures have been passed by the High Courts in Bombay and
Madras on the bar which Section 226 and its predecessors have raised to the
original jurisdiction of the High Courts. I can only add my comment that its
retention is an impediment to justice being had by those who reside or do
business in the city of Calcutta. It is not in the interests of the subject
and it is not in the real interests of the State. It has been used in the
present case to hinder a British national who is not resident in India from
obtaining a judicial determination of his rights.

It has been argued that the proper and only course for the plaintiffs to have
taken to raise this matter was to appeal from the Income-tax Officer to the
Appellate Assistant Commissioner, then to the Appellate Tribunal and then by
way of a case stated to the High Court under Sections 66 and 66A of the Indian
Income-tax Act.

It will be recollected that the plaintiffs raised the question of Section
4(1)(c), Explanation (3), being ultra vires before the Income-tax officer who
did not deal with it but made the assessment. It will be remembered that Mr.
Ryan on August 21, 1941, mentioned this constitutional question to the
Appellate Assistant Commissioner and stated that the form of the proceedings
to raise it was under consideration and asked for an adjournment. The
Appellate Assistant Commissioner replied : "Your proposed proceedings relating
to the constitutional issues cannot arise under the Income-tax Act under
certain provisions of which I am to here and decide the appeal."

I think the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, although he, like the Income-tax
Officer, is not a lawyer, realised that in giving a decision on the validity
of Section 4(1)(c), Explanation (3), he would be going beyond both his
authority and legal capacity. He was employed to administer the Act and he had
to take the Act as he found it. Section 30(i) says :

"Any assessee..... denying his liability to be assessed under this Act........
may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner."

In that appeal both parties had to take the Act as they found it, not the Act
with Explanation [3] of Section 4[1] [c] treated as in doubt. It appears to me
that the Appellate Tribunal, although one of the two members of it is a
gentleman with judicial experience, must take the Act as they find it and not
call it in question.

Section 66 provides that within sixty days of the date on which he is served
with a notice of an order under Section 33[4] the assessee or the Commissioner
may require the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of
law arising out of such order.

I doubt whether the validity of Explanation [3] to Section 4 [1] [c] would
arise out of the order. Moreover raising that question in a reference would
present the Court with serious difficulties since it would not have evidence
before it but only a statement of facts. If a constitutional question of this
sort is to be raised it ought to be raised before a court which can bring
every available fact before it to consider the matter in question in the
proper way. From the decision of the High Court, as Section 66A [2] provides
:-

"An appeal shall lie to His Majesty in Council from any judgment of the High
Court delivered on a reference made under Section 66 in any case which the
High Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal to His Majesty in Council."

Section 66A was amended in 1938 after the Government of India Act had been
passed. No provision has been made in it for an appeal to the Federal Court.
Under Section 205 of the Government of India Act it is provided that an appeal
shall lie to the Federal Court from a judgment of a High Court if the High
Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935, and it shall be the duty
of every High Court to consider in every case whether any such question is
involved, and on its own motion give or withhold a certificate accordingly.
Section 205[2] provides :

"Where such a certificate is given, any party in the case may appeal to the
Federal Court on the ground that any such question as aforesaid has been
wrongly decided.... and no direct appeal shall lie to His Majesty in Council,
either with or without special leave."

In the present case a very important question as to the law-making powers of
the Government of India under Sections 99 and 100 and List 1, Item 54, of
Schedule VII of the Act is involved. It is therefore imperative that the
appeal from the High Court should be to the Federal Court.

It would seem therefore that appeals from High Courts in cases involving
questions of law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act,
1935, cannot go direct to the Privy Council but must go first to the Federal
Court, and as appeals from judgments in references under Section 66 of the
Income-tax Act must go to the Privy Council and not to the Federal Court, and
as this matter involved basically a decision upon a substantial question of
law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935, a suit at
law and not a reference under Section 66 of the Income-tax Act is the proper
procedure.

The plaintiffs claim in this suit is first to have Explanation (3) to Section
4(1)(c) together with relevant words of Section 4(1)(c) declared invalid, and
then the return of the money they have paid together with other connected
reliefs. A decision in this suit will clearly affect the amount of money the
Government will be able to collect as income-tax both in the year in question
and in subsequent years. The suit would therefore appear to be one "concerning
the revenue". It is necessary however to consider what the word "revenue"
means. In 1781, when prohibition against the Supreme Court exercising original
jurisdiction in matters concerning the revenue clearly meant income from land,
but in 1935, when prohibition against the Supreme Court exercising original
jurisdiction in matters concerning the revenue was first introduced into the
Act of Settlement, revenue clearly meant income from land, but in 1935, when
the same provision was substantially re-enacted, revenue, in view of the
provisions of Sections 136 and 138 of the Act of 1935, would clearly include
money derived from income-tax.

In the present case the plaintiffs say that the money they have paid as a
result of the assessment and demand for income-tax is demanded under an
invalid provision of law and therefore the money is not money paid under the
law but is an illegal exaction.

If the money is not income-tax money but an illegal exaction it is money to
which the Government of India has no legal claim or legal right and in that
event it is money which the Government of India ought to repay to the
plaintiffs. Is such money revenue ? The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines
"revenue" to be : "The states annual income from which public expenses are
met." Such definition accords very clearly with the ordinary consumption of
revenue.

In the present case the money the plaintiffs paid went into the Governments
revenue account about March 15, 1941. In that sense it was, when paid,
revenue, as would be all similar subsequent payments when made. As the
relevant financial year ended on March 31, 1941, that money in all human
probability would have been spent by April 17, 1942, when its return was
claimed in this suit. On April 17, 1942, the money was strictly speaking no
longer revenue. Whatever the position of this money on April 17, 1942, it if
was demanded and obtained without any legal authority, it is the Governments
duty to refund it or its equivalent which is the same thing. However, be that
as it may, in the present case the Court is concerned with the legal rights
and liabilities of the parties and therefore in my opinion the word "revenue"
in Section 226 of the Government of India Act, 1935, must be taken to mean
what is revenue according to law or shortly "legal revenue" and not illegal
exactions.

Thus, before it can be decided that Section 226 of the Government of India
Act, 1936, is a bar to the Courts jurisdiction, the Court must decide whether
the money the plaintiffs paid was tax imposed under legal authority or illegal
exaction. If the money was paid as a result of a demand for income-tax legally
imposed. The Court can exercise no original jurisdiction concerning it in a
suit. If the money was paid as the result of a demand made without legal
authority the money is money illegally obtained and held to the use of the
plaintiffs and there is no bar under Section 226 to our exercising original
jurisdiction concerning it in this suit, nor under Section 67 of the Indian
Income-tax Act.

In order to decide whether the money has been demanded and paid legally the
Court must first determine whether the impugned legislation is valid or not.
The Court is bound to inquire into and decide this matter to ascertain whether
it has jurisdiction or not. Section 99[1] of the Government of India Act
provides : "Subject to the provisions of this Act. The Federal Legislature may
make laws for the whole or any part of British India or for any Federated
State." Federation is not yet in being but the Indian Central Legislature has
meanwhile the same law-making powers as those given by the Act to the Federal
Legislature : Section 316 of the Act. Section 99 [2] of the same Act provides
:

"Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by the preceding
sub-section, no Federal law shall, on the ground that it would have extra-
territorial operation, be deemed to be invalid in so far as it applies -

(a) to British subjects and servants of the Crown in any part of In dia; or

(b) to British subjects who are domiciled in any part of India wher ever they
may be; or

(c) to, or to persons on, ships or aircraft registered in British India or any
Federated State wherever they may be; or

(d) in the case of a law with respect to a matter accepted in the Instrument
of Accession of a Federated State as a matter with respect to which the
Federal Legislature may make laws for that State, to subjects of that State
wherever they may be; or

(e) in the case of a law for the regulation or discipline of any naval,
military or air force raised in British India, to members of, and persons
attached to, employed with or following, that force wherever they may be."

Section 100 provides that the Federal Legislature has power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List 1 of the VIIth Schedule.

Item 54 of List 1 reads : "Taxes on income other than agricultural income."

Summing up the Indian Central Legislatures relevant powers in 1939 under
Sections 99(1), 100 and Item 54 of List 1, they were "to make laws for the
whole or any part of British India with respect to taxes on income other than
agricultural income."

Prima facie such laws could have no operation outside British India but
Section 99(2) provides that in certain specified cases in respect of certain
specified classes of persons in certain areas outside British India either
specified or indicated those laws may operate :

(1) as far as British subjects and servants of the Crown are conce rned in any
part of India;

(2) as far as British subjects domiciled in India are concerned, wherever they
may be;

(3) as far as persons on ships or aircraft registered in British India
wherever they may be;

(4) as far as members of and persons attached to or employed with or following
naval, military or air force raised in British India, they may be subject to
laws passed by the Indian Legislature to regulate or discipline them, wherever
they may be.

Again in List 1 of Schedule VII there are the following matters on which the
Government of India may legislate :

Item 3. Extradition and expulsion of criminals and other persons to parts of
his Majestys dominions outside India;

Item 22. Declaration and delimitation of ports;

Item 23. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters;

Item 24. Regulation and organization of air traffic;

Item 25. Lightships, beacons and other provisions for the safety of shipping
and aircraft.

All these matters contemplate the making of laws which may in some events and
to some extent be operative beyond British India.

It is difficult to state the precise effect of the words in Section 99(2)
"without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by the preceding
sub-section...." They are however clearly precautionary and probably mean that
laws made for British India, even when they do not come within the cases sets
out in Section 99(2), may in certain eventualities which are either too
numerous or uncertain to specify, have some extra-territoriality; such as in
the cases prescribed for in Items 3, 21, 23, 24 and 25 of List I, or where
anti-smuggling laws are made as related in Croft v. Dunphy. There may be other
such cases.

Such extra-territoriality would be of the kind and decree necessary to give
efficacy to the legislation as it affected British India-small extensions for
such purpose, perhaps into no-mans air or water, or perhaps by agreement with
a neighbouring State into that State; all other valid extra-territorial
legislation must come within Section 99(2)(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e).

In Croft v. Dunphy Lord Macmillan said : "Where a power is conferred to
legislate on a particular topic it is important in determining the scope of
the power to have regard to what is ordinarily treated as embraced within that
topic in legislative practice and particularly in the legislative practice of
the State which has conferred the power."

In Vol. 47 of the 2nd edition of Halsburys Laws of England which deals with
England Income-tax law as at April 1, 1935, just before the Government of
India Act, 1935, was passed, there is this statement of the English Income-tax
Law, at page 11 :

"The income arising abroad to non-resident is not within the charge to tax,
and non-residents also enjoy specific exemption in certain cases (set out in
footnote :-Interest and dividends of a foreign State or British possession
payable in the U.K., through a paying agent)."

It therefore appears that when the Government of India Act, 1935, was passed
it was not the legislative practice of Great Britain to tax non-residents upon
income received from outside the U.K., or in certain cases from inside the
U.K.

As regards the position in British India in 1935 Sir Asoka Roy for the
Government of India referred the Court to Section 42 of the Indian Income-tax
Act prevailing at the time. It provided as follows :

"In the case of any person residing out of British India, all profits or gains
accruing or arising to such person, whether directly or indirectly, through or
from any business connection or property in British India, shall be deemed to
be income accruing or arising within British India, and shall be chargeable to
income-tax in the name of the agent of any such person, and such agent shall
be deemed to be, for all the purposes of this Act, the assessee in respect of
such income-tax :

Provided that any arrears of tax may be recovered also in accordance with the
provisions of this Act from any assets of the non-resident person which are,
or may at any time come, within British India."

This section provided for the assessment and taxation of the foreigners India
agent, and I doubt if it is extra-territorial in it affect.

The position as regards extra-territorial taxation of a foreigner was
considered by the Bombay High Court in 1931 in the case of the Commissioner of
Income-tax, Bombay v. Goldie, where the Indian Income-tax Authorities
attempted to assess a non resident person in respect of dividends declared in
England by companies registered in England but doing business in India. The
Court held that the non-resident was not so taxable.

It appears therefore that in 1935, legislation in India did not tax non-
residents on income received abroad from companies registered in England
although those companies traded in India. Indeed, had such been the position,
the present legislation now objected to would probably not have been passed by
the Indian Income-tax Amendment Act, 1939.

Reference to the legal position with regard to this matter in England and in
India in 1936 does not mean that the Income-tax law in India after 1935 is to
remain unchanged and unchangeable, but it does lend some support to the view
that where the British Government had refrained from extra-territorial
legislation involving taxation of non-residents upon income received by them
abroad, it did not in the absence of express enactment intend to confer such
power upon the Indian Government by the Act of 1935. Extra-territorial
legislation is apt to produce friction between States and this is certainly so
where one State takes another States nationals as Lord Esher pointed out in
Colquhoun v. Brooks. The reactions to the assessment and demand for tax might
have been much different in the present case had the plaintiffs been an
American Company instead of a British Company.

The dividends in respect of which tax has been claimed and paid in the present
case were all dividends declared abroad by foreign Companies with registered
offices, head offices and share registers either in England or in the Isle of
Man (and were payable and paid either in England or in the Isle of Man) to the
plaintiffs, a company registered in the Isle of Man with its head office in
England. The dividends concerned were therefore debts arising abroad and paid
abroad by Companies resident out of British India to the plaintiffs, another
Company resident out of British India : see London and South American
Investment Trust Ltd. v. British Tobacco Company [Australia] Ltd.

The effect of the words in Section 4(1)(c) "or are deemed to accrue or arise
to him" combined with Explanation (3) "a dividend paid without British India
shall be deemed to be income accruing and arising in British India to the
extent to which it has been paid out of profits subjected to income-tax in
British India" is, as the facts of the present case show, to make liable to
tax in British India foreign money measured in a foreign currency paid in a
foreign country by one foreign Company to another foreign Company in discharge
of a debt which arose and was payable in that foreign country. The condition
attached "to the extent to which it has been paid out of profits subjected to
income-tax in British India" does not make the money any less foreign money
nor does it alter the nature or incidents of the debt. Further the money in
question sought to be taxed was derived from the whole of the sterling
dividend paying Companies operations and not from any particular part again,
if in law the money sought to be taxed could by Explanation (3) to Section
4(1)(c) be attributed to source in British India, that money is the foreign
exchange equivalent of money which has (as the Explanation postulates) been
already subjected to tax in British India and therefore was received by the
foreign dividend paying Company free from liability to tax in British India.

The provision in Section 4(1)(c) and the Explanation which is impugned is not
legislation within the extra-territorial powers given in Section 99(2) of the
Government of India Act since its operation is not limited to the persons and
places named in Section 99(2); it is not legislation dealing with any of the
matters mentioned in the Lists of Schedule VII in which some degree of extra-
territorial legislation may be assumed were necessary to give efficacy to
legislation for British India; it is something beyond all these.

This is a case of the Legislature of British India without specific or
apparent authority stretching out its legislative arm and fiscal hands beyond
British India into other countries in an attempt to tax persons and property
there not subject to its laws. In my opinion, for the reasons given above, the
legislation impugned is not authorised by any provision, either express or
implied, of the Government of India Act, 1935, from which statute the
legislature of British India in 1939 derived its powers. I am therefore of
opinion that the impugned legislation was and is beyond the law-making powers
of the Government of India and therefore invalid. Consequently the words "or
are deemed to accrue or arise" in Section 4(1) of the Indian Income-tax Act
and Explanation (3) thereof are of no legal effect.

The Government of India were only able to obtain the money now claimed in this
suit from the plaintiffs because they were in a position to treat, and
intended to treat, plaintiffs as defaulter under the Income-tax Act and so
collect the money with possible penalties under the provisions of Section 46
of the Act if the plaintiffs did not pay. The plaintiffs had good reason to
believe that their property, i.e., the dividends from the rupee-companies in
India, would be taken from them or from the companies that were due to pay
money to them in India, if they did not yield to the Income-tax Officers
illegal demand. In my view the plaintiffs were in the same position as the
plaintiff in the case of Maskell v. Herner where the plaintiff Maskell sold
his goods in Spitalfields Market and had a demand made upon him by the
defendant for tolls under the threat of seizure of his goods if he refused to
pay. Maskell objected to pay and seizure took place. Maskell then consulted a
solicitor and upon learning that other dealers paid tolls he, acting upon his
solicitors advice, paid the tolls under protest and did so always thereafter.
It was held that the circumstances of the payment and the conduct of the
plaintiff throughout showed that he only paid to avoid seizure of his goods
and never made payments voluntarily, or intended to give up his right to the
sums paid, and that he was entitled to recover those tolls for a period of six
years, the earlier payments being barred by the Statute of Limitation. In
delivering judgment Lord Reading said :

"If a person pays money, which he is not bound to pay, under the compulsion of
urgent and pressing necessity of seizure actual or threatened, of his goods,
he can recover it as money had and received. The money is paid not under
duress in the strict sense of the term, as that implies duress of a person,
but under the pressure of seizure or detention of goods which is analogous to
that of duress. Payment under such pressure establishes that the payment is
not made voluntarily to close the transaction (per Parke, B., in Atlee v.
Backhouse). The payment is made for the purpose of averting a threatened evil
and is made not with the intention of giving up a right but under the
immediate necessity and with the intention of preserving the right to dispute
the legality of the demand (per Tindal, C.J., in Valphy v. Manley). There are
numerous instances in the books of successful claims in this form of action to
recover money paid to relieve goods from seizure."

At page 126 of the report Pickford, L.J., said :

"I do not think that the mere fact that a payment is made under protest is
enough to entitle the payer to recover it back, but if it be shown that it was
made under circumstances which show that the payer intends to resist the claim
and yields to it merely for the purpose of relieving himself of the
inconvenience of having his goods sold, the money can be recovered back, and
the fact of a protest is some indication that it is so made."

It is inconceivable that the plaintiffs in the present case would under
protest have paid money from England in the way they did over four lakhs of
rupees - or in English currency over 30,000 Pounds - to the Income-tax Officer
in Calcutta but for the fact that the Income-tax Officer held threats of the
Income-tax Act over their heads and the fear that he would use powers under
Section 46 to take the plaintiffs money coming from the rupee company whether
they liked it or not.

Having found that the money now claimed was money paid by the plaintiffs to
the Government of India as aforesaid as a result of a demand made under a law
which the Government of India had no power to make and so an invalid law, I am
of the opinion that the suit does not concern revenue in the sense used in
Section 226, viz., legal revenue, and that therefore the provisions of Section
226 of the Government of India Act do not bar our jurisdiction.

I am therefore of opinion that the plaintiffs are entitled to a declaration
that the legislation impugned is invalid and to return of the money so paid,
viz., Rs. 4,35,290-5-0 - money had and received - together with interest
thereon at four per cent. per annum from the date of the notice of claim,
viz., December 21, 1942, until payment thereof.

MITTER, J. - The Raleigh Investment Company Limited, hereafter called the
company, is a non-resident company. It is the principal shareholder in two
companies, for brevitys sake called the rupee companies and in seven other
companies, for brevitys sake called the sterling companies. We are not
concerned in this suit with the assessment of the company to income-tax in
respect of the dividends it had received from the rupee companies. The suit
concerns only with the income-tax assessed on the dividend it received from
the sterling companies.

The sterling companies are incorporated in England. Their principal place of
business is in England where the share registers are kept. They carry on
business operations in British India and other places. Dividends are declared
in England. The dividends on which the plaintiffs company has been assessed to
income-tax here had been declared in England, paid to it in England, and no
part of it had been brought into British India. It was assessed to income-tax
by the Income-tax Officer, District C-III, Calcutta, on the basis of
Explanation 3 to Section 4 of the Indian Income-tax Act, XI of 1922 (hereafter
called the Act), on the December 23, 1940, for the financial year 1939-40. It
preferred an appeal on the June 6, 1941, to the Appellate Assistant
Commissioner under Section 30 of the Act, but did not proceed with the appeal
which was dismissed for default on the January 17, 1942.

The Income-tax Officer served a demand notice on the company requiring payment
of the tax by the March 15, 1941. The company on getting the same cabled to
the Income-tax Officer from England on the February 28, 1941, before filing
the appeal, for postponement of the payment of the tax till the disposal of
the proposed appeal and requested the latter not to treat it in default while
the appeal would be pending. The cable was received by the Income-tax Officer
on the March 4, 1941, who sent a reply by cable on the same date expressing
regret, and at the same time asked the company to arrange for payment by the
March 15, 1941. The money was paid by that date. This suit was filed by the
company on the Original Side of this Court in April, 1942.

On the pleadings the following five issues have been raised :

1\. Has the company any cause of action ?

2\. Is the suit barred by reason of the provision of the Indian Income-tax Act
?

3\. Has this Court, in the exercise of its original jurisdiction power to
entertain the suit in view of Section 226 of the Government of India Act, 1935
?

4\. Is Explanation (3) to Section 4 of the Income-tax Act ultra vires and
legislature ? and

5\. What relief, if any, is to be given to the company ?

I would take up the fourth issue first.

The charging provisions (Sections 3 and 4) of the Income-tax Act before its
amendment by Act VII of 1939 were as follows :-

A person whether residing in or outside British India in the relevant year,
was chargeable only in respect of the income (a) which had arisen or accrued
to him in the accounting year in British India or (b) which had been received
by him in British India. In the case of a resident only income which had
arisen or accrued outside British India was to be deemed, subject to some
limitations, to have arisen or accrued to him if it was either received or
brought into British India. A non-resident could not have been assessed to tax
on income which had arisen or accrued outside British India or income received
outside British India even though it may have subsequently been brought into
British India. The sentence "arises or accrued or received" etc., occurring in
sub-section (1) of Section 4 was construed dis junctively. By the amending Act
of 1939 Section 4 was in the first place re-arranged. Effect was given to the
decisions under the old Act to the effect that two separate ideas had been
expressed in sub-section (1) of Section 4, the phrase "arise or accrue"
connoting one idea and the word "received" another distinct idea. The
liability to be taxed on income received or deemed to have been received in
British India was put under a separate clause (clause (a)) which means that
the liability on the ground of receipt in British India would be on a person,
be he a resident or non-resident . We are not concerned with that case. The
Section then places the assessee under two categories : (1) when he is a
resident in British India and (2) when he is not : (clauses (b) & (c)). With
regard to residents the general provision is that he is to be assessed on
income which had not only arisen or accrued in British India or was deemed to
have arisen or accrued in British India but also on income which had arisen or
accrued outside British India. With regard to non-residents, however, they can
be assessed on income which had arisen or accrued in British India or which is
deemed to have arisen or accrued in British India. Explanation (3) to Section
4 which concerns dividends only includes the case where the dividend which did
not in fact accrue to a person in British India is deemed to have accrued to
him in British India, if it was paid out of profits (and to the extent
thereof) of the company in which the dividend producing shares were held if
those profits had been subject to income-tax in British India. Whether
Explanation (3) is a good piece of legislation in reference to a person who is
a resident in British India we are not called upon to decide, for in the case
before us the plaintiff is a non-resident company. Income which in fact had
arisen or occurred to a non-resident outside British India is brought within
the British Indian assessment by this Explanation, for dividend which accrues
to a share-holder of a company is income which is quite distinct from the
income of the company in which the shares are held, even when the whole of the
share capital of the company is held by that share-holder. This follows from
the observations of Fletcher-Moulton, L.J., in Gramophone and Typewriter Ltd.
v. Stanley and of Lord Wrenbury in Bradbury v. English Sewing Cotton Co. The
property of a person who may be the subject of another independent foreign
State and may be a resident of such a State, and over whom the Indian
Legislature has no jurisdiction is thus brought under the provision of a
taxing statute enacted by the British Indian Legislature. Limiting Explanation
(3) to the case of a non-resident, that explanation is a piece of extra-
territorial legislation, not by a supreme or paramount legislature but by a
subordinate legislature, which derives its authority from Parliament under the
Government of India Act, 1935. The question is whether the explanation so far
as it affects non-residents is ultra vires the Indian Legislature. The powers
of the Indian Legislature during the transitional period are defined in
Sections 99 and 100 of the Government of India Act, 1935. Item No. 54 of List
I of the Seventh Schedule to that Act is "tax on income other that
agricultural income." The subject accordingly falls within the field of
legislation by the Indian Legislature.

Under the Government of India Act, 1915, the jurisdiction of the Indian
Legislature to legislate was defined specifically. Subject to some exceptions
not material for this case, it had power to legislate for all persons and
things within British India (Section 65 clause (a)). The Government of India
Act, 1935, contains no provision exactly similar to Section 65(a). Section
99(1) read with Section 100 of the Act of 1935 authorizes the Federal
Legislature (Indian Legislature, during the transitional period : Section 316)
to legislate for the whole or any part of British India in respect of the
subjects specified in Lists I and III of the Seventh Schedule. Sub-section (2)
of Section 99 expressly gives it power to legislate extra-territorially over
some classes of persons. In respect of item No. 23, and it may be, No. 21 of
List I, also the same power exists. That being the position we are to see
whether in respect of income-tax the Indian Legislature has power to legislate
extra-territorially. In my judgment that question must be answered on general
principles keeping at the same time in view the provisions of Section 99.

The Imperial Parliament, being a sovereign legislature, is not subject to any
restraint so far as concerns municipal laws. It power and jurisdiction is so
transcendent and absolute that it cannot be confined either for causes or
persons within any bounds. According to International Law, however, it is not
competent to the British Parliament to enact laws for foreigners out of the
British Dominions and beyond jurisdiction or for vessels on the high seas or
foreigners beyond the Empire. But if such a statute is passed, the domestic
courts - the Courts of the British Isles, of the Dominions and of the Empire
-are bound to obey and administer them, it being left to the Government to
justify its action with other countries diplomatically. It is a foreign
question altogether how for the domestic courts would be able to enforce their
decrees or how far those decrees may be recognised by courts of foreign
countries. A subordinate legislature is, no doubt, not an agent or delegate of
the supreme legislature in respect of legislation on the permitted subject but
has plenary powers : Rex v. Burah, Hodge v. The Queen. That does not
necessarily imply that it can legislate on the permitted subject in an extra-
territorial manner in the same way as the supreme legislature. If the judgment
of Lord Macmillan in Croft v. Dunphy be considered in its entirety it cannot
be said that his Lordship was laying down by the observations at page 163 of
the report, that every subordinate legislature can legislate with extra-
territorial effect on the permitted subject just as the Imperial Parliament,
for on the next page he observes that a statute violating International Law
passed by the Imperial Parliament cannot be challenged as ultra vires in a
domestic court but such a statute passed by a subordinate legislature can be
challenged as ultra vires in a domestic court on the ground that the Imperial
Parliament must not be taken to have granted the power to enact such a statute
to a subordinate legislature. In the early part of judgment I have pointed out
that Explanation (3) to Section 4 of the Indian Income-tax Act has the effect
of drawing in income that may have accrued within the territories of another
independent foreign State to a person who may be the subject of, and resident
in, the territories of another independent foreign State. In my judgment the
general principle is that a subordinate legislature can legislate only within
its territorial limits (Macleod v. Attorney-General for New South Wales)
unless otherwise authorized by the Imperial Parliament, either expressly or by
necessary implication. Such an authority has been expressly conferred on the
Indian Legislature in matters mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 99 and
in some of the items of List I, as for instance item No. 23. Whether a power
to legislate extra-territorially has been conferred by the Imperial Parliament
on a subordinate legislature by implication has to be determined on certain
considerations. Before, however, examining what those considerations should
be, I may point out that the principle of interpretation expressed by the
maxim expression units exclusion alter us cannot be invoked to construe a
constitutional enactment, the provisions of which by the very nature of the
subject must to a certain degree be worded in elastic forms. I cannot
therefore accept the argument advanced on behalf of the plaintiff company that
the Imperial Parliament by specifying the subjects over which the Indian
Legislature can legislate extra-territorially intended that over all other
subjects it was not to have that power.

In deciding the question whether the power to legislate extra-territorially
has been conferred on a subordinate legislature by implication the following
are the material considerations :-

(1) the legislative practice on that subject in the mother country, Croft v.
Dunphy, (2) the legislative practice in the territory subject to the
jurisdiction of the subordinate legislature at or before the Constitution Act
under consideration, Byramjee Jeejeebhoy v. Province of Bombay also In re
Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act,
1938, and, (3) nature of the subject-matter of legislation.

In considering the nature of the subject-matter of legislation in reference to
the question now before us the guiding principle is that "you can complement a
given power but cannot supplement it." If legislation on the permitted subject
would not be effective without a provision being enacted having extra-
territorial operation a power to legislate extra-territorially will be
implied; for instance where the permitted subject of legislation is defence of
the territory subject to the jurisdiction of the subordinate legislature, a
provision in a statute which deals with that subject would not be considered
ultra vires, because the provision has extra-territorial effect, the principle
being that the Sovereign Legislature gave the subordinate legislature such a
power by necessary implication. The absurdity of limiting the power to
legislate within the territorial bounds in such a matter is well expressed by
the phrase "Imagine the navy confined to the three mile limit." The cases
where the validity of laws of exclusion and expulsion passed by the Colonial
or Dominion Legislature were considered also fellow within this category :
(see Attorney-General for Canada v. Cain and Gilhula).

The legislative practice in England in income-tax matters is summarised at
pages 27 and 35 of Lord MacMillans Report (Income-tax Codification Report of
1936). According to the legislative practice in England a person who is a
resident in the United Kingdom is charged upon the whole amount of his profits
and gains whether they arose from property in the United Kingdom or elsewhere.
The word "elsewhere" which ordinarily would include the rest of the earth
outside the United Kingdom was by judicial decisions given a limited meaning.
A person who is now a resident in the United Kingdom is charged only in
respect of the profits derived from property situate within the United
Kingdom. Lord Herschell summarised the law on the subject as in force in
England in Colquhoun v. Brooks, thus :

"The Income-tax Acts themselves impose a territorial limit; either that from
which the taxable income is derived must be situate in the United Kingdom or
the person whose income is to be taxed must be a resident there."

In British India the first Income-tax Act was passed in 1860 (Act XXXII of
1860). Only persons resident in India were charged on annual profits arising
from property whether situate in India or elsewhere and from trade, profession
or employment whether the same was carried on in India or elsewhere. Non-
residents, however, were charged only on profits of property situate in India
and on profits of trade, profession, and employment carried on in India.
Dividends and interests on money or securities were charged only if they were
payable in India. The duration of the Act was for five years. The next Act, IX
of 1868, was an Act which imposed tax on professions and trades carried on in
India. It did not impose a tax on income but a tax in the nature of licence
fees. The next two Acts (IX of 1869 and XVI of 1870) proceed on same lines.
Every office or employment of profit in British India and salaries, annuities
and pensions paid in British India, the profits of shipping companies trading
between British India and outside and profits of companies made in British
India were taxed. By the Act of 1871 (XII of 1871) other incomes were brought
in the field of taxation, but only the income which had accrued in British
India was to be taxed. The next Act, II of 1886, made income which had arisen
or accrued in British India or which had been received in British India or
salaries paid to a British subject in the Native States by the Government of
India or by a local authority could only be taxed. The Act of 1918 (Act VII of
1918) charged all income which arose, accrued or was received in British India
or which under the provisions of that Act was to be deemed to have arisen,
accrued or to have been received in British India. The only provision in that
Act which defined what was to be deemed to have arisen etc., in British India
was Section 33 which corresponds to Section 42 of the Act of 1922(XI of 1922).
The last mentioned Act, as it stood in 1935, and before the amendment of 1939,
made the income of a resident taxable when the income had accrued, arisen or
had been received in British India, or though arising out of British India,
has been received or brought into British India within a certain time, but
with regard to a non-resident he could be taxed only in respect of income
which had accrued or arise in British India or which had been received there.
The extending Section was Section 42. The legislative practice in India up to
1935 was not to assess a non-resident who had no business connection in
British India, to income-tax in respect of an income which had not arisen or
accrued to him in British India or which had not been received by him in
British India. Moreover the nature of the subject of legislation does not
necessarily require any legislative provision of extra-territorial operation.
I cannot therefore hold that the Indian legislature had been given by
implication the power to legislate extra-territorially with regard to income-
tax matters. Explanation (3) to Section 4 is accordingly ultra vires to the
extent it relates to a non-resident who does not fulfill the conditions of
Section 42 in respect of his income which did not in fact arise or accrue to
him in British India. I refrain from making any observations with regard to
any other case.

The two cases on which the learned Advocate-General has relied strongly are
decisions of the Federal Court of Australia. They are The Colonial Gas
Association v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation and Trustees, Executors and
Agency v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation. The first case concerned income-
tax and the second succession duty. I have not been able to secure the
Australian Income-tax Act but from the summary of its provisions as made by
Tomlin, J., as he then was, in London and South British Investment Trust Co.
Ltd. v. British Tobacco Co. Ltd., and from Section 20(2)(b) as quoted in the
Colonial Gas Associations case it appears that a company which carries on
business in Australia is taxed by the Australian Statute on so much of its
income which it does not distribute amongst its share-holders. The Company is
also taxed on what it distributes as dividend to its members who are not
residents in Australia, the company being given the right to deduct the tax
from the dividend payable to non-resident share-holders. There is therefore no
attempt to tax directly an absentee shareholder in respect of income which did
not accrue to him in Australia. In the Colonial Gas Associations case, where
the question was whether the amount paid to a non-resident debenture-holder
could be taxed by the Australian Statute, Dixon, J., pointed out that the
purpose of that statute was not dependent on the liability of the debenture-
holders to pay income-tax to the Australian Government, but its purpose was to
impose only upon such companies which derived assessable income from Australia
and on no others, an original or independent liability. The liability to the
Growth was imposed on the company. No doubt the Australian legislature
intended that the incidence of the tax should be ultimately on the absentee
debenture-holder . This was sought to be effected by giving the company the
right to deduct and retain the amount of tax payable by it on the interest
payable to the absentee debenture-holder from the amount payable to them.
Dixon, J., however stated in clear words that the company could not escape
assessment simply because foreign courts may, by reason of the laws of that
foreign country, refuse to recognize the right of deduction so given to the
company by the Australian legislature. The majority of the Judges agreed with
Dixon, J. In this view as to the scope of the Australian Statute no question
of its having extra-territorial effect arises. The Statute was certainly intra
vires, as the Australian legislature legislated on a subject which was within
the territorial limits of Australia. Evatt, J., however, adopted the reasons
which he had given in the earlier case, namely in Trustees, Executors and
Agency v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation. In support of his view that the
State legislature had power to legislate extra-territorially he gave four
reasons :

(i) that the Australian Commonwealth has full self-government and the
Commonwealth Parliament has power to legislate extra-territorially, as such a
power is an essential part of the conception of self-government;

(ii) that Croft v. Dunphy had laid down that the Canadian Parliament had the
powers of a full Sovereign legislature, and the observations made therein
would apply to the Commonwealth Parliament of Australia;

(iii) that the legislative powers of the States of the Australian Commonwealth
regarding extent are the same as that of the Commonwealth Parliament; and

(iv) that the questioned legislation, even if it had extra-territorial effect,
would be perfectly valid, if in some aspects and relations it bears upon the
"peace, order and good government" of the Dominion or the constituting States,
as the case may be, either generally or in respect to specific subjects -

In my judgment the rules laid down by Evatt, J., in Trustees, Executors and
Agency v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation cannot be the true guide for
deciding the question before us. India is not yet a self-governing unit of the
Empire. For all practical purposes it is still a dependency. The Indian
Constitution is materially different from Canadian and Australian
Constitutions, and Evatt, J., was confining his observations to the
constitutions of those two countries, where matters of peace, order and good
government were entirely the concern of the Dominion Commonwealth or the
States. Besides, his observations do to a certain extent go against the
general principle laid down by Lord Halsbury in MacLeods case and is against
the decision of Tomlin, J., in London and South American Investment Trust
Limited.

Issue No. 1. - The contention of the learned Advocate-General is that the
income which has been assessed, e.g., the dividends from the sterling
companies did in fact arise or accrue to the plaintiff company in British
India. If that be so, the plaintiff company would not be affected by
Explanation (3) to Section 4 and so would not have the right to question its
validity. Moreover, the suit will have to be dismissed on the merits, if his
contention be accepted.

For determining this point the material facts are as follows :-

(i) The sterling companies are incorporated in England;

(ii) The place of central control of those companies is in England;

Their principal place of business is in England. It is from there that their
chief operations are controlled, managed and directed;

(iii) The shares of those companies have been issued in England, the share
registers are kept in England, dividends are declared in England and paid in
England;

(iv) Those companies carry on business in British India and earn profits here.
They have been assessed to income-tax in British India on their profits earned
in British India;

(v) The Raleigh Investment Company is a non-resident Company;

(vi) The dividends in question had been declared and paid to it in England.

Leaving out the case where income is not received in British India income of a
non-resident is assessable in British India only if the income had accrued or
had arisen in British India or is deemed to have arisen or accrued in British
India. Explanation (3) to Section 4, which deals with dividend only, defines
the circumstances under which a class of income actually arising or accruing
outside British India is deemed to have arisen or to have accrued in British
India. Section 42 which is not relevant to the case before us, for the
assessment is not as an agent of the plaintiff company, also mentions the case
where income would be deemed to have arisen etc., in British India. For the
purpose of this issue we have to leave out those two cases, namely Explanation
(3) to Section 4 and Section 42. We are to see, fiction apart, whether the
income of the company derived from dividends paid by the sterling companies
had in fact arisen or accrued in British India. The cases established the
following proposition, namely :-

"the situs of the income is the situs of the fund from which the income is
directly derived, that is to say, in the case before us, the situs of the
shares held by the plaintiff company would determine the place where the
income had arisen or accrued to it."

Regarding the situs of the shares two views have been maintained namely :-

(a) the place of "residence" of the company in which the shares are held
determining the situs of the shares : and

(b) the situs of the shares is where the share register of the company is
kept.

The main proposition is established by the cases of Commissioner of Income-
tax, Bombay Presidency v. Raja Bahadur Bansilal Motilal, and Commissioner of
Income-tax, Bombay v. Swarup Chand Hukumchand. This is also the effect of the
decision of the Judicial Committee in Income-tax Commissioner, Bombay v.
Chunilal Mehta where the place of profit earning was taken to be the situs of
the contracts which produced the proof to the assessee.

Regarding situs of the shares the first view is what has been adopted in
Bradbury v. English Sewing Cotton Co. At page 753, Lord Cave, L.C., observed
thus : "A share or a parcel of stock is an incorporeal thing, carrying the
right to a share in the profits of a company; and where the company is, there
the share is also, and there is the source of any dividend paid upon it." He
held that the American Company was resident in England in the three years in
question (1914-1915 to 1916-1917), and the dividends received by the English
Company by reason of its share-holdings in the American Company were income
which had accrued to it in England and not from foreign possessions. According
to this view the place of residence of the sterling companies it the relevant
year would be the determining factor.

The cases on the subject of residence of companies lay down that the place of
incorporation of the company is not a very important factor. The accepted view
is that for purposes of income-tax a company must be taken to reside at the
place from which its real business is carried on, that is to say, "where the
central management and control abides"; De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. v.
Howe, Bradbury v. English Sewing Cotton Co. A company may no doubt have, like
a natural person, more than one place of residence, but in that case the
central management and control must be divided and exercised from more places
than one : Swedish Central Ry. Co. v. Thompson.

The other view is that the situs of the shares for purposes of taxing statutes
must be taken to be the place where the share register is kept, "for the
evidence of title to shares is the share register". This is the view taken in
Brassard v. Smith, and London and South American Investment Trust v. British
Tobacco Co.

Whichever view be accepted the situs of the shares which the plaintiff company
had in the sterling companies would not be in British India but in England.
The income in the shape of dividends paid by the sterling companies to the
plaintiff company therefore arose or accrued not in British India but in
England. The case of the Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay v. Major Goldie is
an authority directly on the point. The plaintiff company has assessed to
income-tax in British India in respect of those dividends on the basis of
Explanation (3) to Section 4 of the Indian Income-tax Act, which made, by a
fiction so to say, the income from those dividends, which in realty had arisen
and accrued outside British India, to be income which had arisen or accrued in
British India. The plaintiff company is accordingly entitled to challenge the
legality of that explanation.

Issue No. 2. - The second and third issues must be decided on the basis of the
allegation that the assessments is ultra vires, a point on which I have
already recorded my finding. Two grounds have been urged in support of the
contention that the provisions of the Income-tax Act bar the suit. It is
firstly urged that the only manner in which the plaintiff company could
proceed to have relief was by following the machinery provided for in the
Income-tax Act; by first appealing to the Appellate Assistant Income-tax
Commissioner under Section 30, then, to the Appellate Tribunal under Section
33 and then coming up to the High Court by way of reference under Section 66.
Secondly, it is contended that Section 67 of the Income-tax Act expressly bars
the suit.

The general principle has been formulated by Willes, J., in Wolverhampton New
Water Works Co. v. Hakesworth. The third proposition that he laid down is that
when a statute creates a new liability-aliability not existing at common law-
and at the same time gives a special and particular remedy for enforcing it,
the remedy provided for in the statute must be followed and the party is not
entitled for in the statute must be followed and the party is not entitled to
have recourse to an action in the civil court. In Bhai Sankar v. The Municipal
Commissioners of Bombay, Sir Lawrence Jenkins, C.J., stated the third
proposition of Willes J., in a different form. He thus observed : "But where a
special tribunal out of the ordinary course is appointed by an Act to
determine questions as to rights which are the creation of that Act, then
except so far as otherwise expressly provided or necessarily implied, that
tribunals jurisdiction to determine those questions is exclusive." These
principles have been applied by the other Indian High Court and by the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Secretary of State for India v.
Mask & Co., a case on which the learned Advocate-General has also relied. In
my judgment these principles can be invoked by the defendant for the purpose
of defeation the suit before us, only if it can be shown that the point raised
in the suit and on the basis of which the plaintiff seeks relief, could have
been determined by the special tribunals set up by the Income-tax Act.

Section 30 of the Act create a tribunal to which the assessee dissatisfied
with the assessment made by the Income-tax Officer is to go in the first
instance. What questions he can raise before that tribunal are indicated in
the section itself. He can object to the amount of his income as determined by
the Income-tax Officer or to the amount of loss computed under Section 24 or
the amount of the tax etc. He can also deny his liability to be assessed under
the Act. That phrase to my mind mean that he can only urge before that
tribunal that the provisions as they stand in the Act do not make him liable,
i.e., exempt his income or a part of his income from assessment. He cannot
urge there that though a provision of the Act makes his income or part thereof
liable to be assessed, that provision is illegal, being ultra vires the Indian
Legislature. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner would not be competent to
entertain or decide that question. On the principle that the scope of an
appeal cannot be enlarged but must be limited to points which were open for
adjudication by the court or tribunal of first instance the Appellate Tribunal
functioning under the Act, to which an appeal is taken under Section 33, would
have no power to entertain the said question question and deal with it in its
order. This court on a reference being made to it under section 66 cannot also
deal with such a question, as the reference must be limited to points arising
out of the order passed by the Appellate Tribunal. In accordingly overrule the
first ground of attack made by the defendant.

The second ground urged by the learned Advocate-General that Section 67 of the
Act bars the suit. To support their respective contentions the learned
Advocate appearing for the parties have cited a large number of decisions. One
of the cases on which the learned Advocate-General has most strongly relied is
Secretary of State v. Meyoppa Chettiar. In that case the plaintiff was
assessed to income-tax by the Income-tax Officer on a finding that he was a
resident of British India. In the suit he alleged that he was not a resident
of British India of but Saigon. He prayed for a declaration that the
assessment was illegal and for recovery of the money which he had paid on
demand by the Income-tax Officer. Section 67 of the Income-tax Act was
successfully pleaded and the suit was dismissed. In the course of his judgment
Varadachariar, J., observed that where a statute contains a specific provision
limiting or excluding the jurisdiction of civil courts the determination of
the ambit of the civil courts jurisdiction must rest upon the language used in
the private provision and cases decided on the provisions of statutes couched
in different language would be of little assistance. I agree with thou
observations to this extent that the language of the private provisions is of
prime importance, but I do not agree to the further proposition (if that be
its meaning that it would not be legitimate to refer to decisions given on
other statutes even when the private provisions are of similar scope. I would
not, however, burden my judgment thy reference to the decision in suits
brought for declaration that rates imposed under the provisions of the Bengal
Municipal Act had not been legally imposed. I would confine myself to
decisions in suits relating to income-tax and to decisions in other suits
where the private provisions in the statute are of similar scope. The first
case is Haji Rahamatulla v. Secretary of State for India in Council. In that
case a person, whose place of residence was outside British India, was
assessed on profits, which also had accrued outside British India, under the
Income-tax Act of 1886 (Act II of 1886). He brought a suit for a declaration
that the assessment on him was illegal. Section 39 of the Act II of 1886 which
is couched exactly in the same terms as the first part of Section 67 was
pleaded as a bar to the suit. The plea was overruled on the ground that if the
questioned assessment was ultra vires that Section did not stand in the way of
the plaintiff. This case was cited in Meyappa Chettiars case but was
distinguished on two grounds : (1) that the Act of 1886 contained no provision
corresponding to the second part of the Section 67, and (2) the said Act did
not provide the same safeguards, as in the act of 1922, by way of appeal and
reference to the High Court with a further right of appeal to the Privy
Council. In my judgment Haji Rahamatullas case cannot be put aside on these
grounds of distinction. The second part of the Section 67 deals with a
different subject altogether. The Act of 1886 contained provisions for
revision, firstly to the Collector, and then to the Commissioner of the
Division. There was no doubt no provision for a reference to the High Court
and for further appeal to the Privy Council, but in my judgment the scope of a
private provision like that contained in Section 39 of Act II of 1886 or in
the first part of the Section 67 of the Act of 1922 would neither be enlarged
or curtailed by reason of the number of appeals from the assessment order
provided for by the statute. The next case of importance is Raja of Ramnad v.
Secretary of State. The Income-tax Act under consideration was the Act of
1918. Section 52 contained the private provision which is exactly in the same
terms as Section 67 of the Act of 1922. At page 17 of the report the learned
judges made the following observations : "A civil suit is barred under
recession 52 of the Income-tax Act of 1918. If the tax was lived under that
Act, no doubt, a suit would be barred, but if the assessment was made in
respect of an item of income which is not assessable under the Act civil suit
would lie, inasmuch as the officer making the assessment had no jurisdiction
to make it. In cases in which the Income-tax Officer has to decide whether a
certain item of income is assessable or not, his decision cannot be said to be
ultra vires even if it is illegal. But where a certain income is outside the
scope of the Act, such as agricultural income or income not earned in or
brought into British India, any assessment in respect of such income would be
outside the scope of the Act, and a civil suit to recover it would not be
barred by reason of Section 52." In my judgment the rule thus formulated is
the correct rule, and further it is on the principle indicated in this
passage, that Meyyappa Chettiars case and other cases cited by the learned
Advocate-General, to which I will refer later on, are to be distinguished. The
rule of that if the imposition is ultra vires, statutory provisions, which
purport to take away the jurisdiction of civil courts would not be considered
effective to bar a suit receives support from the decisions of the Judicial
Committee in Secretary of State v. Fahaminnessa Begum, where in spite of the
provisions of Section 6 of Act IX of 1847 it was held that a civil suit was
maintainable to declare that the assessment of revenue made by the revenue
authorities was illegal on the ground that on a contraction of the provisions
of Act IX of 1847 the revenue authorities could not have legally imposed
revenue on the land in question. The decision of the Bombay High Court in Bhag
Chand Dagdusa v. Secretary of State for India in Council, affirmed on appeal
in (54 I.A. 338), on a different ground also supports the same view. In that
case a large body of shop-keepers of Malegaon filed a suit against the
Secretary of State for India for a declaration that a certain notification
issued by the District Magistrate, by which compensation for damage caused at
a riot and the costs of additional police for keeping order were to be
recovered, was illegal and for injunction. A notice under Section 80 of the
Code of Civil Procedure was given, but the suit was filed before the expiry of
two months from the date of that notice. The Secretary of State raised three
substantial questions : (1) that Section 4(f) on the Bombay Revenue
Jurisdiction Act (Act X of 1876) barred the suit, (2) that the suit having
been instituted before two months of the notice given under Section 80 of the
Civil Procedure Code was premature, and (3) the challenged notification was a
valid one. The trail Court gave effect to all the three contentions and
dismissed the suit. On appeal the Judges of the Bombay High Court were divided
on the question as to whether notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil
Procedure was required, the suit being for injunction. Both of them held that
the notification was perfectly valid, but that if the notification had been
illegal the suit would not have bed barred under Section 4(f) of the Bombay
Revenue Jurisdiction Act in respect of the tax relating to additional police
charges. Shah, A.C.J., observed thus : "Apart from this ground it is clear
that the provision (Section 4(f) of the Revenue Jurisdiction Act) cannot apply
where the legality of the order of the Government is questioned. It would
apply to a case of rate which is authorised, that is, legally authorised, by
the Government. In the present case the legal basis for the action of
Government is questioned and I think that the suit is not barred by this
clause even as regards the tax relating to additional police charges, provided
it is established that the rate is not legal. Thus the objection (about the
maintainability of the suit) would apply to police charges, if it be proved
that the rate is legally authorised." Section 4(f) of Act X of 1876 runs as
follows : "Subject to the exceptions hereinafter appearing no civil court
shall exercise jurisdiction as to any of the following matters :

* * * 

(f) claim against the Crown to hold land wholly or partially free from
payments charged on or payable out of land revenue, or to set aside any less
or rate authorized by the Government under the provisions of any law for the
time being in force,"

On appeal by the plaintiffs to the Privy Council the suit was dismissed. The
Judicial Committee held that the notification so far as it related to the
collection of compensation was perfectly valid, but it was not valid so far as
it related to the collection of additional police charges. Lord Summer then
went on to examine the position as to whether the suit so far as it related to
additional police charges was maintainable or not. He held that it was not
maintainable in view of the provisions of Section 80 of the Code of Civil
Procedure but at the same time did not dissent from the observations made by
the Bombay High Court in respect of the scope of Section 4(f) of the Revenue
Jurisdiction Act.

The case on which the learned Advocate-Generally has relied are Forces v.
Secretary of State for India, Dr. R. N. Singha v. Secretary of State for
India, Secretary of State for India v. Forbes and Secretary of State for India
v. Meyyappa Chettiar. In none of those cases was the question of ultra vires
raised. In all of them the assessment was not outside but under the Income-tax
Act and the suits challenged the correctness of findings on points which the
Income-tax Officer was competent to determine. In Secretary of State for India
v. Mask & Co. a case which concerned customs duties, the plaintiff contended
that the goods which he had imported were of a different description from what
the Customs authorities took them to be and so the proper duty payable was at
a lower rate. That case is also of the same type as the first mentioned case.
In the suit before us Section 67 is of no avail to the defence as the suit is
not for setting aside or modifying an assessment made under that Act. It is a
suit for a declaration that the assessment is unauthorised by the Act and
outside the Act as it ought to stand after Explanation (3) to Section 4 is
struck out on the ground that it is ultra vires the legislature. I would
accordingly answer this issue in favour of the plaintiff.

Issue No. 3. - For deciding the third issue the provisions of Section 226 of
the Government of India Act, 1935, have to be considered. It is a section
which still stands in the statute book in spite of the fact that the
historical reasons for the enactment have long disappeared. It has the effect
of taking away the original jurisdiction of this Court in matters in respect
of which courts subordinate to this court would have original jurisdiction. It
is an anomaly that this Court cannot exercise its functions in the exercise of
its original jurisdiction in matters concerning revenue. Be that as it may, we
have to give effect to th at Section.

The section is divided into two parts, The Court has no original jurisdiction
in (1) any matter concerning revenue or (2) in any matter concerning any act
ordered on done in the collection of revenue. I do not agree with the
interpretation put upon this section in The Dewarkhand Cement Co. Ltd. v.
Secretary of State for India to the effect that the two parts of the Section
express two distinct and mutually exclusive ideas, namely, "the first part
refers to preliminary proceedings taken for the purpose of determining the
amount of revenue and the second part to the machinery to enforce the payment
of revenue." The second part no doubt refers to the machinery for enforcing
payment of revenue but I am not prepared to say that the first refers only to
preliminary proceedings taken for the purpose of determining the amount of
revenue. Such a view would conflict with the decision of the Judicial
Committee in Alcock, Ashdown & Co. v. Chief Revenue Authority, Bombay. In that
case Lord Phillimore laid down that the High Court in the exercise of its
original jurisdiction had power, in spite of Section 106 of the Government of
India Act, 1915, to interfere by issuing a purgative writ at the stage when
the preliminary proceedings were being taken for assessing the amount of
income-tax. In my judgment the first part of the Section includes the matter
dealt within the second part of the section. A matter concerning revenue would
include a matter relating to the collection of revenue. In my opinion the
second part of the cessation has been enacted to give an indemnity to revenue
officers who in the discharge of their duties may have collected or may have
made attempts to collect revenue by passing orders or by doing things which
may not be strictly according to law but which they bona fide believed to be
in accordance with law.

The cases cited by the learned Advocate-General are cases which concerned the
collection of what was in fact revenue or was found to be revenue. The first
case is the case of Spooner v. Juddow. The act that was done there was an
attempt to collect quit rent due to the East India Company by executing a
distress warrant. It could not be justified in law, for the distress warrant
issued against one person was executed against another and for a liability
whip was not fully the liability of the latter. A suit for damages was brought
against the Govt., agent who had executed the said warrant. The main defence
was that the suit was not maintainable in view of the provision is of sustain
9 of 37 Ego. III, c. 142, which was in the seams terms as Section 226 of the
Government of India Act, 1935. In reversing the judgment of the Bombay High
Court the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council pointed out that the case
cannot be decided on the plain language of the Section. For if the act done
was strictly in accordance with law, the Section would be redundant, the
Section was accordingly interpreted in the manner which I have indicated
above. The cases of Messrs. Best & Co. v. The Collector of Madras
Gobindarajulu Naidu v. Secretary of State for India Thin Yen v. Secretary of
State for India Dewarkhand Cement Co. Ltd. v. Secretary of State for India
Thyagaraja Chettiar v. Collector of Madura and Bhimwandiwalla v. Secretary of
State for India are cases which fall within the second part of Section 226. In
all the cases except the last the act ordered or done by the revenue
authorities related to collection of what was admittedly and beyond question
revenue and in the last mentioned cases as also in Spooners case, what was
ordered to be collected was found to be revenue by the Court after
adjudication. In all those cases the construction given to the second part of
the Section in Sooner v. Juddow was reiterated. Spooners case and
Bhimwandivallas case, are of importance for the purpose of showing that where
there is a dispute as to whether a particular levy is revenue or not, that
dispute must be adjudicated upon by the court and only if the court finds that
it is revenue, then and then only can the bar of Section 226 be invoked and
applied. In my judgment that is the correct approach, as it accords with
fundamental principles. The first proposition that is well established is that
the condition on which the right of a court of limited jurisdiction to
exercise jurisdiction depends must be fulfilled, those conditions may be of
various kinds. They may be founded either upon the character of constitution
of the tribunal, or upon the nature of the subject-matter of enquiry, or upon
certain proceedings which have been made essential preliminaries to the
enquiry, or upon the existence of some facts. If there is any dispute as to
those facts that Court is not only entitled to adjudicate upon them but must
do so. Only its decision on the point would be open for re-examination by a
superior four or tribunal : Colonel Bank of Australia v. willan. It follows as
a converse proposition that where a court has a general jurisdiction. That is
to say, jurisdiction to entertain suits for proceedings of a civil nature, and
its jurisdiction over a particular subject-matter, which would otherwise be
within its competence, is excluded by a statute, and there is a dispute as to
facts, which if established, would oust its jurisdiction, that Court would
have not only the power but would be under a duty to give its decision on the
said dispute. Unless the private statute plainly prohibits it from
adjudicating upon toes disputed facts. In the light of these principles this
court has the power to determine whether the subject matter of this suit
concerns revenue. If it does, the suit would be barred, otherwise not. In my
judgment on the plaintiff company is or can be called revenue in the popular
sense or the defendant gives it that designation. Revenue is that which the
State collects from the subject or from the possessions of the State for the
purpose of carrying gout its administrative and governmental duties. In the
first mentioned case it involves the right to levy form the subjects. If the
right does not exist in respect of a particular matter, what is assessed or
collected would not in my judgment be considered AAC revenue within the
meaning of Section 226, although the name of a tax may be given to it. Without
a valid act on the part of the State, what is callef or designated by its as
revenue cannot be revenue. In this view of the matter I agree with the
concession that was made by the Advocate-General. Bombay, in Byramjee Jeebhoy
v. Province of Bombay, that Section 226 of the Government of India Act
contemplates a "valid revenue," and with the observation of Beaumont. C., that
"before the Section (226) can apply, however, we must determine that the tax
which is challenged is legal if it is not. Its imposition does not concern
revenue." I accordingly hold that Section 226 is not a bar, the questioned tax
imposed on the plaintiff company being illegal, as Explanation (3) to Section
4 is ultra vires the India Legislature.

Issue No. 5. - On the conclusions to which I have arrived at the company is
entitled to the relief as prayed for in prayer (b) of the plaint. The company
is also entitled to get a refund of Rs. 4,35,290-5-0 which was paid by it. I
have already held that Explanation (3) to Section 4 being ultra vires the
Indian Legislature, that sum cannot be called revenue, and consequently the
second part of Section 226 of the Government of India Act, 1935, places no
bar. Even before the Income-tax Officer the company had taken up the position
that it was not liable to be taxed in British India on dividends paid by the
sterling companies. On a demand notice being served requiring payment of the
amount by the March 15, 1941, it pleaded for time by cavil boa the answer was
that time could not be extended and that if the payment was not made by the
March 15, 1941, the company would be treated as in default, which implied that
a penalty, which may be equal to the amount of the assessed tax, may be
imposed. On these facts I hold that not only the payment was made under
protest, but it was made under circumstances which would entitle the company
to receiver it on the basis of Section 72 of the Indian Contract Act as
interpreted by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Seth Kanhaya Lal
v. The National Bank of India Ltd. The company would also be entitled to
recover interest on the said amount from the date of demand (December 22,
1941) till recovery. I agree with my Lord Chief Justice that the rate should
be 4 per cent. simple.

I do not see my way to grant prayer (c). There is no likelihood that the
Income-tax Officer would make any attempt in future to assess the company on
dividends form the sterling company, if our judgment to the effect that the
assessment is illegal, be upheld on appeal.

LODGE. J. - I am in entire agreement with the opinion expressed by Matter, J.,
on issues Nos. 2 and 4 as framed by him and with the reasons given, and I have
nothing to add to his judgment so far as these issues are concerned.

In placing his argument on issue No. 1, Sir. A. K. Roy enunciated the
following propositions :-

The plaintiff Company held shares in the sterling companies, i.e., invested
money in the sterling companies. In order to obtain an income, the sterling
companies had to do business-the shares would not of themselves earn any
income. Therefore the income came through the business operations of the
sterling companies carried on in India. The profits of the sterling companies
became the subject matter of taxation in British India and were taxed and
thereby impressed, as it were, with a label that they were something which had
arisen or accrued in British India. The dividends were paid out of those
profits. It is normally to be expected that dividends will be declared when
profits are made; the profits of the sterling companies constituted the income
of the shareholders, though at that stage inchoate. The resolutions of the
Boards of Directors declaring dividends did not produce the income; they
merely released it. This release was merely the last stage in the process of
accrual.

This agreement implies that the income of the Company is in fact the income of
the share-holders and that the company is merely the channel through which
that income is received. It also implies that money received by way of profits
in India retains its indentity (as though it were a manufactured product
stamped "Made in India") as it subsequently passes from hand to hand.

Mitter, J., has shown in his judgment that there is the highest judicial
authority for the view that the income of the share-holders is quite distinct
from the income of the Company, even when the whole of the share capital is
held by one share-holder. It seems to me that the provisions of the Indian
Income-tax Act itself lead to the same conclusion. Under the provisions of
that Act a company pays income-tax and super-tax on its profits. Thereafter
the share-holder who receives a dividend is assessed to income-tax and super-
tax on that dividend. The shareholder is required however to payh income-tax
not on the amount of the dividend actually received, but on that amount
increased by a proportionate share of the income-tax paid by the company. He
is then credited with having paid that proportionate share. As Income-tax.
When it comes to super-tax however, no credit is given to the share-holder for
the super-tax already paid and he is again required to pay super-tax on the
dividend so increased. It follows that either the Shri-holder is assessed
twice to super-tax on the same income or the income of the share-holder is,
for the purposes of the Indian Income-tax Act, regarded as distinct and
separate from the income of the company. As the Indian Income-tax Act does not
authorise the assesment of a person twice to super-tax on the same income the
second of the above views must be correct.

The second argument that the money received as profits retains its indentity
when passed on, is in my opinion equally fallacious. If this argument were
sound it would follow that the income of employees of the sterling companies,
received in the form of salaries in London for work done in London, would have
a source or origin in India, and would have to be regarded as accruing or
arising in India-a view which seems to me untenable.

For these reasons, and for the reasons given by Mitter, J., in his judgment, I
agree that issue No. 1 must be answered in the affirmative.

Issue No. 3. - I am unable to accept the view that Section 226 of the
Government of India Act, 1935, is not a bar to our exercising jurisdiction in
the matters now before us. That section is a relic of an old quarrel and is
founded on consideration is essentially different from those on which
provision such as those in Section 67 of the Income-tax Act are based. The
jurisdiction of the Civil Courts is excluded by Section 67 of the Income-tax
Act and by similar Section in other statutes because under those statutes
other tribunals have been established to give the necessary relief to
aggrieved parties. But Section 226 of the Government of India Act operates
whether the aggrieved person has or has not a remedy under the particular Act,
indeed, the very wording of the Section indicates that there may be instances
when an aggrieved person will have a remedy in Civil Courts if the cause of
action arises outside the territorial limits of the original jurisdiction of
the High Court but will have no such remedy if the case of action arises
within those limits. For these reasons it seems to me that no assistance to
the undertaking of the provisions of this Section can be obtained for the
reasoning given in decisions as to the applicability of such provisions as
Section 67 of the Income-tax Act.

Section 226(1) of the Government of India Act, 1935, reads as follows :-

"Until otherwise provided by the act of the appropriate legislator, no High
Court shall have any original jurisdiction in any matter concerning the
revenue, or concerning any Act ordered or done in the collection thereof
according to the usage and practice of the country or the law for the time
being in force."

The plaintiffs contend that if any provision of the Income-tax Act is ultra
vires of the Indian Legislature the giving of a decision thats ultra vires is
not the exercise of original jurisdiction in any matter concerning the
revenue. Nor does it concern any act ordered or done in the collection there
of according to the law for the time being in force.

Mitter, J., in his judgment has pointed out that none of the rulings in whip
Section 226 of the Government of India Act, 1935, was held to be a bar, is of
any assistance to us, inasmuch as in each of those cases the court was
concerned with "an act ordered or done in the collection of the revenue
according with" an arc ordered or done in the collection of the revenue
accordion got the usage and practice of the country or the law for the time
being in force.; and there was no question whether the provisions of the Act
were ultra vires of the Indian Legislature.

I have no difficulty in accepting the argument that where a proviso of the
statute is found to be ultra vires of the legislature, an act ordered or done
under the provisions is not an act ordered or done according to the law for
the time being in force, and therefore the original jurisdiction of the High
Court to determine whether a provisions is ultra vires or not, is not excluded
by the second part of Section 226(1) of the Government of India Act. The
problem is whether that jurisdiction is excluded by the first part of the
Section, viz., "No High Court shall have any original jurisdiction in any
matter concerning the revenue."

The cases cited, in which this portion of the Section has been considered are
three in number. In Block. Ashdown & Company, Limited v. Chief Revenue
Authority, Bombay, the question in issue was whether the High Court had power
to make an order requiring the Chief Revenue Authority to perform his
statutory duty of stating a case and referring it to the High Court under
Section 51 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1918. The Judicial Committee observed
: "In their Lordships view the order of the High Court to a revenue officer to
do his statutory duty would not be the exercise of "original jurisdiction in
any matter concerning the revenue", and the latter part of the clause need not
be considered, for the proceedings in this case had not to do with the
collection of the revenue, but with the preliminary assessment to ascertain
what that revenue was."

This decision emphasizes the distinction between two parts of Section 226 (1)
of the Govt., of India Act, 1936, and suggests that if the statutory duty in
question has to do with the collect of the revenue, and not merely with the
preliminary assessment, the power of the High Court to issue a direction to a
revenue officer to perform that duty may possibly be excluded by this Section.

But so far as the first part of the Section is concerned, this decision does
not suggest that any special or limited interpretation is to be placed on the
words any original jurisdiction in any matter concerning the revenue : the
decision merely lays down that the issue of an order to a revenue officer to
perform his statutory duty of stating a case is not exercise of original
jurisdiction in a matter concerning the revenue.

In Dayaldas Kushiram v. The Commissioner of Income-tax, Central and Income-tax
Officer, Section 11(Central), it was held that an order directing a revenue
officer to forbear from doing something which he believes wrongly to be his
statutory duty, cannot fall within Section 226(1) of the Government of India
Act. This decision purports to follow Alcock, Ashdown & Company Limited v.
Chief Revenue Authority, Bombay (1923) L.R. 50 I.A. 227, and for our present
purposes. Does not go further than the earlier authority.

Sir Byramjee Jeejeebhoy v. The Province of Bombay and Another 3(1940) I.L.R.
1940 Bom. 58; 7 I.T.R. 670; 3 F.L.J.H.C. 23 is the only decision which seems
to me to have a direct bearing on the question before us. In that case the
question before the court was whether Part VI of the Bombay Finance Act, 1932,
as amended in 1939 was ultra vires of the local legislature. Sir Jamshedji
Kanga for the plaintiff argued (page 62) "Section 226 of the Govt. of India
Act, 1935, should be strictly construed. It only takes away the original
jurisdiction of the High Court in any matter concerning the revenue. Before
the Section could operate there must exist a valid Act and without a valid Act
there can be no revenue. The jurisdiction to determine the validity of the Act
is not taken away by Section 226."

The Advocate-General in reply conceded (page 66) the point. He argued that
Section 226 contemplates the existence of valid revenue and stated the the was
unaware of a case where the jurisdiction of the Court was barred when the
validity of the Act imposing the revenue was in question. In delivering
judgment Beaumont, C.J, observed : "Before the Section can apply, however, we
must determine that the tax which is challenged is legal; if it is not, its
imposition does not concern revenue, but it is a nullity. To refuse
jurisdiction to try this question would involve dismissing the case against
the plaintiff without hearing him, this point was not seriously contested by
the Advocate-General." It is clear form the above fact that the point was not
seriously contested. For myself, with great respect to the learned Judges, I
am not satisfied that that decision was correct.

What is the position in the present case ? The Central Government in an
attempt to increase the revenue considers whether it has a right, to tax
certain incomes. Believing in good faith that it has the right it obtains the
necessary statutory authority from the Indian Legislature. The Income-tax
authorities aces the incomes in question, demand payment of the tax. Realism
the same and appropriate the money to the revenue of the country. The
questions in issue are-Has the Indian Legislature the power to tax these
incomes ? Can the Indian revenue be increased in this manner ? Is the amount
realised from the plaintiff, which has been claimed as revenue, realised as
revenue, and treated as revenue, to continue to be so treated or is it to be
deducted from the funds claimed by the Government as its revenue and refunded
to the plaintiff.

It seems to me that if the ordinary meaning is to attic to the words "any
matter concerning the revenue" then all these questions are matters occurring
the revenue. In other words, a decision that something is not valid revenue
concerns the revenue as much as a decision that it is valid revenue.

The argument that Section 26 is a bar only to the exercise of jurisdiction in
matters concerning valid revenue seems to me to conflict with the principle
laid down in Spooner v. Juddow 1(1845-51) 4 M.I.A. 33. The same argument would
apply to cases where the revenue officer misunderstood the valid provisions of
the Act and assessed to tax incomes not assessable under the Act-because the
amount realised would not be valid revenue.

Similarly if the revenue officer by mere mistake in arithmetic demanded and
realised from an assessee more than was legally payable, the illegal excess
would not be valid revenue, and according to this argument, the jurisdiction
of the High Court to grant relief in respect thereof would not be barred. In
other words, the jurisdiction of the High Court would be barred under Section
226 of the Government of India Act, 1935, only in those cases where the
plaintiff on the merits was not entitled to succeed. In my opinion neither the
plain words of the Section nor the decision of the Judicial Committee in
Alcock, Ashdown and Company Limited, justify such an interpretation.

I am of opinion that Section 226 of the Government of India Act, 1935, is a
bar to our entertaining the preson suit, and that the plaint should therefore
be returned to the plaintiff for presentation to the proper court.

It only remains for me to add that if I were not convinced that the Section
226 of the Government of India Act, was a bar to the exercise of jurisdiction
by us in this matter, I should agree with the order propped by my Lord the
Chief Justice.

Order accordingly.

