

Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal - Delhi

Panacea Biotech Ltd. vs Commissioner Of Customs (Acc) on 8 November, 2002

Equivalent citations: 2003 (151) ELT 132 Tri Del

Bench: S Kang, A T V.K.

ORDER V.K. Agrawal, Member (T)

1\. The issues involved in this Appeal, filed by M/s. Panacea Biotcch Ltd.,
are whether the fermenter imported by them is classifiable under sub-heading
8419.89 of the First Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act as claimed by them or
under sub-heading 8479.89 as decided by the Commissioner in the impugned
Order; whether benefit of Notification No. 16/2000-Cus., dated 1-3-2000 (S.No.
202) is available to the Fermenter and whether the payment for the documents
relating to design, engineering and site run is to be included in the
assessable value of the fermenter.

2\. Shri V. Lakshmi Kumaran, learned Advocate, submitted that the Appellants
are, inter alia, engaged in the manufacture of life saving drugs including
vaccines of Hepatitis "B"; that for the manufacture of said vaccine, they
require fermenters and other ancillary equipments; that they imported a pilot
fermenter (Biostat-C) and two commercial fermenters; that in addition they
also imported from the supplier of the fermenter, documents capturing design,
Engineering and site run of the fermenters and claimed classification under
sub-heading 4911.91 of the Tariff; that Heading 84.19 of the Tariff
specifically covers machinery for the treatment of materials by a process
involving a change of temperature; that the change of temperature may be
brought about by processes such as heating, cooking, roasting, distilling,
rectifying, sterilizing, pasteurizing, steaming etc. that it is apparent from
Page 6 of the Catalogue that the fermenter provides automatic in situ
sterilization with a choice of steam heating or electrical heating system;
that the impugned goods thus performs sterilization and also involves heating
by steam or electricity; that the catalogue shows that fermenter has a
thermostat system which has a closed loop hot water system with a circulating
pump and two heat exchangers for cooling water; that catalogue further,
mentions that the thermostat system enables operating temperature up to 90°C
and sterilization temperature adjustable from 100°C to 130°C The learned
Counsel thus contended that the impugned fermenter involves treatment of the
cell medium by a process involving change of temperature and also
sterilization which are specifically covered by Heading 84.19; that
accordingly the fermenter has to be classified under Heading 84.19. He also
added that the show cause notice categorically admits that the vaccine
production takes place in the fermenter by way of increase in temperature;
that HSN Explanatory Notes, Heading 84.10 covers vessels, vats, etc. which
involve treatment of materials by heating etc., that in view of this
categorical position from the HSN Explanatory Notes and the catalogue and the
admission in the show cause notice, classification under sub heading 8419.89
is the correct classification. Alternatively he mentioned that if the impugned
product is classified under sub-heading 8479.89, benefit of Notification No.
6/2000-Cus. is available; that serial No. 202 of the said Notification covers
"machinery for production of commodities"; that since the fermenter produced
vaccine, which is a commodity, exemption under the notification is available;
that the reasoning of the Adjudicating Authority that the fermenter alone
cannot be said to produce the vaccine is incorrect as the vaccine is produced
in the fermenter and is only bottled in the vials by a different equipment.

3\. The learned Counsel also submitted that the manuals for design engineering
and site run have also been supplied for DM 3.30 Lakhs; that though the
Adjudicating Authority has accepted the classification of the same under
Chapter 49 of the Customs Tariff, he has included the value thereof in the
assessable value of the fermenter under Rule 9(1)(c) of the Customs Valuation
Rules read with the decision of the Supreme Court in Collector of Customs v.
Essar Gujarat Ltd. - 1996 (88) E.L.T. 609 (S.C.); that the Manuals in question
are not for the manufacture of the fermenter nor for the vaccines; that the
manufacture of vaccine is undertaken under WHO Guide to Good Manufacturing
Practice Requirement (GMP); that GMP is that part of quality assurance which
ensures that products are consistently produced and controlled by the quality
standards appropriate to their intended use and as required by marketing
authorization; that the GMP covers not only the manufacturing process but also
the equipment used to manufacture the said vaccines; that the Appellants have
sought documentations pertaining to Installation Qualifications (IQ) and
Operational Qualifications (OQ) of the imported fermenter; that these manuals
document the process by which the fermenters were manufactured by the supplier
in Germany; that M/s. B. Braun Biotech International, Supplier, under letter
(at Page 85 of Paper Book) had clarified that the fermenter would be sold at a
price of D.M. 10.20 Lakhs without these tests and the manuals; that the said
letter clearly establishes that the consideration for the manuals is not a
condition for the sale of fermenter; that as such Rule 9(e) of the Customs
Valuation Rules would not apply; that Interpretative Note to Rule 4
categorically provides that the value of the imported goods shall not include
charges or costs for technical assistance undertaken after importation
provided that the said costs arc distinguished from the price actually paid or
payable; that the cost for the manuals is distinguished separately from the
price paid for the ferments; that if the manuals are to be treated as
technical assistance for manufacture of vaccine, then it amounts to charges
for technical assistance undertaken after importation of the goods. The
learned Advocate also relied upon the decision in the case of Associated
Cement Co. v. C.C. - 2001 (128) E.L.T. 21 (S.C.) wherein the Supreme Court has
held that drawings, designs, manuals, etc. imported in printed form are
classifiable under Chapter 49. Finally the learned Advocate mentioned that
filing of two Bills of Entry for two different types of goods or claiming
classification under a particular Tariff Item cannot attract confiscation or
penalty. He relied upon the decision in the case of Northern Plastics v. CCE
-1998 (101) E.L.T. 549 (S.C.).

4.1 Countering the arguments, Shri M.P. Singh, learned DR, mentioned that Me
Graw Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms defines "fermentation"
as under :

"Fermentation (Microbio) An enzymatic transformation of organic substances,
especially carbohydrates, generally accompanied by the evolution of gas; a
physiological counter part of oxidation, permitting certain organisms to live
and grow in the absence of air; used in various industrial process for the
manufacture of products such as alcohols, acids and cheese by the action of
yeasts, molds, and bacteria; alcoholic fermentation is the best known
example."

4.2 The learned DR submitted that fermentation takes place by the action of
bacteria and not by the treatment of materials by a process involving a change
of temperature; that admittedly the appellants use fermenter for the
manufacture of vaccine for Hepatitis 'B'. He, further, submitted that the
impugned goods have certain parts which have heating element but that cannot
be factors determining the classification of the products; that machine as a
whole has to be considered for determining its classification in the Customs
Tariff and not on the basis of only one part; that whole fermenter cannot be
classified on the basis of a single part; that as such Heading 84.19 is
completely ruled out. He also mentioned that manuals in question came along
with machines as per contract, that the Price summary mentioned the price of
Fermenters and Design Engineering and Site Run; that both the prices taken
together constitute the contract; that Design Engineering and Site Run are
required for manufacture of vaccine as per requirements of WHO; that both were
imported under one master Air Way Bill; that the Appellants de-linked both the
items and filed separate Bills of Entry; that the classification of documents
is not in dispute; the issue is whether their value has to be included in the
value of the Fermenters imported by them. Regarding the eligibility to
Notification No. 16/2000-Cus., the learned DR reiterates the findings as
contained in the impugned order. In reply, the learned Advocate mentioned that
if the classification of the Manuals is not disputed by the Revenue, no
controversy survives as the duty, if any, would be payable under Chapter 49.

5\. We have considered the submissions of both the sides. Heading 84.19 of the
Customs Tariff covers machinery and plant designed to submit materials to a
heating or cooling process in order to cause a simple change of temperature or
to cause a transformation of the materials resulting principally from the
temperature change. The heading mentions "heating" and "sterilizing" as some
of the temperature changes. The appellants want to classify the fermenter
under this Heading as the fermenter provides in situ sterilization and also
involves heating. On the other hand, the Revenue has contended that the
fermenter is used for manufacture of vaccine which does not take place on
account of change of temperature. The learned DR has referred to the
definition of term "fermentation" as given in Me Graw Hill Dictionary of
Scientific and Technical terms according to which fermentation is an enzymatic
transformation of organic substances and is used in various industrial process
by the action of yeasts, molds and bacteria. Fermenter, according to said
Dictionary, is a vessel used for fermenting. We also observe that it is
mentioned in Kirk-Othrner Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology that though the
fermentation process is used in a number of products ranging from amino acids
to enzymes, the technology used is somewhat standardized. According to the
said Encyclopedia, "Although the word fermentation referred originally to the
anaerobic metabolism of organic compounds by micro-organisms or their enzymes
to produce products simpler than the starting material, the modern definition
is that of any microbial action controlled by man to make useful products.
Products from aerobic metabolism include antibiotics (qv), organic acids (see
carboxylic acids), enzymes (qv) and vitamin (qv)". It further mentions that
"Molds, yeasts (qv), bacteria and streptomycetis are among the microorganisms
used in fermentation process today." It is thus evident that fermenter is not
a machinery or equipment for the treatment of materials by a process involving
a change of temperature as required for the goods to be classified under
Heading 84.19 of the Tariff. As such, we uphold the classification of the
fermenter under sub-heading 8479.89 of the Customs Tariff.

6\. Regarding documents for design engineering and site run, the learned
Advocate for the Appellants have contended that these are not manuals which
are required for the manufacture of the fermenter or vaccines. According to
him manufacture of vaccines is undertaken under WHO Guide to Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Requirements. According to the Introduction, this
guidance document has been prepared to aid vaccine manufacturers in the
preparation and performance of the validation studies required by GMP of the.
World Health Organization. The Good Manufacturing Practices, according to WHO,
is that part of quality assurance which ensures that products are consistently
produced and controlled to the quality standards appropriate to their intended
use and as required by the marketing authorization. GMP covers all aspects of
the manufacturing process. It is thus apparent that these documents are
essential for the appellants to manufacture vaccines as per the GMP
requirements. In view of this, the value of these documents has been rightly
added into the value of the fermenter. The letter of the foreign supplier does
not advance the case of the Appellants as it merely mentions that fermenters
are also sold without the manuals. But the facts remains that a manufacturer
of vaccine for conforming to GMP requirements has to take manuals with machine
from the supplier only. The letter makes it clear that tests and documents are
not ordinarily performed made available and Installation Qualification and
Operational Qualification tests are conducted only were strict requirements
according to WHO Guide to GMP requirements specified by the buyers. The ratio
of the decision in the case of Associate Cement Companies Ltd. is not
applicable as facts are entirely different since the issue involved therein
was assessment of drawings, designs and technical material imported through
couriers. We hold that the value of the manuals has to be added to the value
of the fermenter for the purpose of levy of Customs Duty. We, however, agree
with the learned Advocate that the goods cannot be confiscated merely because
they filed two Bills of Entry as the issue involved is one of interpretation
as to whether the cost of manuals is to be included in the value of imported
goods or not. There is no other allegation that any fact or document was
suppressed from the Department. We, therefore, set aside the confiscation and
consequential redemption fine and penalty imposed on the Appellants. Regarding
eligibility of the impugned fermenter to the benefit of Notification No.
16/2000-Cus., we find that the same has not been considered by the
Adjudicating Authority. We, therefore, remand the matter to the Adjudicating
Authority only to consider hearing the Appellants as to whether the goods in
question are eligible to the benefit of Notification No. 16/2002.

7\. The Appeal is disposed of in the above manners.

