

Supreme Court of India

Prabha Shankar Dubey vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2003

Author: Arijit Pasayat

Bench: Doraiswamy Raju, Arijit Pasayat

    
    
               CASE NO.:
    Appeal (crl.)  634 of 2003
    Appeal (crl.)  1122 of 2003
    
    PETITIONER:
    Prabha Shankar Dubey					
    
    RESPONDENT:
    State of Madhya Pradesh 					
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT: 02/12/2003
    
    BENCH:
    DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJIT PASAYAT
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

J U D G M E N T ARIJIT PASAYAT, J These two appeals relate to the common
judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court
at Jabalpur Bench upholding conviction of the appellants (hereinafter referred
to as the accused by their respective names) for commission of offence
punishable under Section 18 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act'). In addition to custodial
sentence of 10 years, a fine of Rs.1,00,000/- was imposed.

Prosecution version as unfolded during trial is as under: On 3.11.1998 S.B.
Shrivastava (PW-6) received information that two persons in possession of
opium were going on scooter No.M.P.-04-R-7693 from the side of new jail to
Gandhi Nagar. This information was recorded at Serial No.216 in Roznamcha and
transmitted to the C.S.P. as per Ex.P-

1\. The accused persons were stopped and apprised through the notices Ex.P-10
and Ex.P-11 that if they so desire, can be taken to a Magistrate or a gazetted
officer for search. They opted to be searched by him. On their search 200
grams of opium was found on the "person" of each of them. It was seized as per
seizure memos Ex.P-4 and Ex.P-6. Samples of 10 grams each were taken and
sealed. The seized opium in sealed condition was deposited in Malkhana of the
police station. The crime was registered as per Ex.P-12. The information
relating to search and arrest of the accused persons was sent to the superior
officer on 5.11.1998 as per Ex.P-2. The sealed samples were sent to the
Forensic Science Laboratory and as per report Ex.P-14, the commodity which was
seized was found to be opium. The accused persons pleaded not guilty. Their
defence was that they have been falsely implicated.

The trial Court held that the testimony of the investigating officer to be
reliable and unbreakably supported by the Onkar Singh Kushwaha (PW-1) and
Rajindra Singh Yadav (PW-3)-Police Constable, who accompanied him though the
two panch witnesses Ramesh (PW-4) and Yakoob Khan (PW-5) did not support the
prosecution version. The trial Court held that there was full compliance with
the statutory requirements contained in Sections 42, 50, 55 and 57 of the Act
and, therefore, convicted and sentenced the appellants as afore-noted. Appeals
before the High Court as indicated at the threshold did not bring any relief
to the accused-appellants.

In support of the appeals, learned counsel appearing for the accused-
appellants mainly focused on alleged non-compliance with the requirements of
Section 50 of the Act. According to them, mere asking the accused as to
whether they would like to be searched by the Gazetted Officer or the
Magistrate is not sufficient compliance of the requirements embodied in
Section 50 of the Act. By merely asking them what is to be done is seeking
their opinion and not making them aware of their right. Great emphasis is laid
on certain observations made by a Constitution Bench in State of Punjab v.
Baldev Singh (1999 (6) SCC

172). With reference to the questions that were formulated for determination
in Baldev Singh's case (supra), it was submitted that the sanctity that is
attached to the compliance with the requirements has to be culled out from
references made to the principles under the Preventive Detention Laws, The
Fifth Amendment to the American Constitution and the imperative and obligatory
nature of the duty as indicated in D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal (1997 (1)
SCC 416). The Act provides stringent measures attached for infraction. That
itself brings in the necessity to ensure strict compliance with the
requirements. What has been done in the instant case is not in any way
compliance with the requirements as there was no specific information given
about the right. It is pointed out that in some cases, this Court has said
that substantial compliance would be sufficient which is against the settled
position in law that in respect of penal statutes substantial compliance will
not be sufficient.

In response, learned counsel for the State submitted that the purpose of
informing the accused is to ensure that there is transparency and is aimed at
ruling out allegations of false implication. There is no specific manner in
which the information/intimation is required to be given. The accused did not
opt to be searched by the Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate even though it
was pointed out to him that he had the choice. It was not as if he had limited
option. The search could be conducted in the presence of the named officers to
the exclusion of the officer making the offer for the search if accused so
chose. According to learned counsel, before the Constitution Bench in Baldev
Singh's case (supra) the form of information/intimation aspect was not under
consideration.

In order to appreciate rival submissions, some of the observations made by the
Constitution Bench in Baldev Singh's case (supra) are required to be noted. It
is also to be noted that the Court did not in the abstract decide whether
Section 50 was directory or mandatory in nature. It was held that the
provisions to the Act implicitly make it imperative and obligatory and cast a
duty on the investigating officer (empowered officer) to ensure that search of
the person (suspect) concerned is conducted in the manner prescribed by
Section 50 by intimating to the person concerned about the existence of his
right that if he so requires, he shall be searched before a Gazetted Officer
or a Magistrate and in case he so opts, failure to conduct his search before a
Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate would cause prejudice to the accused and
render the recovery of the illicit articles suspect and vitiate the conviction
and sentence of the accused. Where the conviction has been recorded only on
the basis of the possession of the illicit article, recovered during a search
conducted in violation of the provisions of Section 50 of the Act, it was
illegal. It was further held that the omission may not vitiate the trial as
such, but because of the inherent prejudice which would be caused to an
accused by the omission to be informed of the existence of his right, it would
render his conviction and sentence unsustainable. In paragraph 32 of the
judgment (at page

200) this position was highlighted. In para 57, inter alia the following
conclusions were arrived at:

"(1) That when an empowered officer or a duly authorized officer acting on
prior information is about to search a person, it is imperative for him to
inform the person concerned of his right under sub- section (1) of Section 50
of the Act of being taken to the nearest gazetted officer or nearest
Magistrate for making the search. However, such information may not
necessarily be in writing.

(2) That failure to inform the person concerned about the existence of his
right to be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate would cause
prejudice to an accused.

(3) That a search made by an empowered officer, on prior information, without
informing the person of his right that if he so requires, he shall be taken
before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate for search and in case he so opts,
failure to conduct his search before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate, may
not vitiate the trial but would render the recovery of the illicit article
suspect and vitiate the conviction and sentence of an accused, where the
conviction has been recorded only on the basis of the possession of the
illicit article, recovered from his person, during a search conducted in
violation of the provisions of Section 50 of the Act.

(5) That whether or not the safeguards provided in Section 50 have been duly
observed would have to be determined by the court on the basis of the evidence
led at the trial. Finding on that issue, one way or the other would be
relevant for recording an order of conviction or acquittal. Without giving an
opportunity to the prosecution to establish, at the trial, that the provisions
of Section 50 and, particularly, the safeguards provided therein were duly
complied with, it would not be permissible to cut short a criminal trial.

(6) That in the context in which the protection has been incorporated in
Section 50 for the benefit of the person intended to be searched, we do not
express any opinion whether the provisions of Section 50 are mandatory or
directory, but hold that failure to inform the person concerned of his right
as emanating from sub-section (1) of Section 50 and render the recovery of the
contraband suspect and the conviction and sentence of an accused bad and
unsustainable in law.

(7) That an illicit article seized from the person of an accused during search
conducted in violation of the safeguards provided in Section 50 of the Act
cannot be used as evidence of proof of unlawful possession of the contraband
on the accused though any other material recovered during that search may be
relied upon by the prosecution, in other proceedings, against an accused,
notwithstanding the recovery of that material during an illegal search."

It is not disputed that there is no specific form prescribed or intended for
conveying the information required to be given under Section 50. What is
necessary is that the accused (suspect) should be made aware of the existence
of his right to be searched in presence of one of the officers named in the
Section itself. Since no specific mode or manner is prescribed or intended,
the Court has to see the substance and not the form of intimation. Whether the
requirements of Section 50 have been met is a question which is to be decided
on the facts of each case and there cannot be any sweeping generalization
and/or strait- jacket formula.

Section 50 does not involve any self-incrimination. It is only a procedure
required to protect the rights of an accused (suspect) being made aware of the
existence of his right to be searched if so required by him before any of the
specified officers. The object seems to be to ensure that at a later stage the
accused (suspect) does not take a plea that the articles were planted on him
or that those were not recovered from him. To put it differently, fair play
and transparency in the process of search has been given the primacy. In
Raghbir Singh v. State of Haryana (1996 (2) SCC 201), the true essence of
Section 50 was highlighted in the following manner:

"8. The very question that is referred to us came to be considered by a Bench
of two learned Judges on 22.1.1996 in Manohar Lal v. State of Rajasthan
(Crl.M.P.No.138/96 in SLP(Crl.)No.184/1996). One of us (Verma, J), speaking
for the Bench, held:

"It is clear from Section 50 of the NDPS Act that the option given thereby to
the accused is only to choose whether he would like to be searched by the
officer making the search or in the presence of the nearest available Gazetted
Officer or the nearest available Magistrate. The choice of the nearest
Gazetted Officer or the nearest Magistrate has to be exercised by the officer
making the search and not by the accused".

9\. We concur with the view taken in Manohar Lal's case supra.

10\. Finding a person to be in possession of articles which are illicit under
the provisions of the Act has the consequence of requiring him to prove that
he was not in contravention of its provisions and it renders him liable to
severe punishment. It is, therefore, that the Act affords the person to be
searched a safeguard. He may require the search to be conducted in the
presence of a senior officer. The senior officer may be a Gazetted Officer or
a Magistrate, depending upon who is conveniently available.

11\. The option under Section 50 of the Act, as it plainly reads, is only of
being searched in the presence of such senior officer. There is no further
option of being searched in the presence of either a Gazetted Officer or of
being searched in the presence of a Magistrate. The use of the word 'nearest'
in Section 50 is relevant. The search has to be conducted at the earliest and,
once the person to be searched opts to be searched in the presence of such
senior officer, it is for the police officer who is to conduct the search to
conduct it in the presence of whoever is the most conveniently available,
Gazetted Officer or Magistrate".

As has been highlighted in Baldev Singh's case (supra) it has to be seen and
gauzed whether the requirements of Section 50 have been met. Section 50 in
reality provides for additional safeguards which are not specifically provided
by the statute. The stress is on the adoption of a reasonable, fair and just
procedure. No specific words are necessary to be used to convey existence of
the right. In the case at hand the information was conveyed in the following
manner:

"By way of this notice you are informed that we have received information that
you are illegally carrying opium with you, therefore, we are required to
search your scooter and you for this purpose. You would like to give me search
or you would like to be searched by any gazetted officer or by a magistrate".

In response to the aforesaid intimation each of the accused gave in writing as
follows:

"Sir, I have no objection if you search me or my scooter".

    
    
    Sd/-			Sd/-					Sd/-
    Ram Vilas		Prabhashankar		at 14.20 P.M. 
    		3.11.1998		3.11.98			Thana Shahjaibad
    							at 14.25 P.M.
    									Thana Shahjaibad".
    
    
    
    

The notice in the present case has great similarity with what was conveyed to
the accused in Joseph Fernandez v. State of Goa (2000 (1) SCC 707). It was
inter alia held in the said case as follows:

"2. Learned counsel tried to highlight a point that Section 50 of the Act has
not strictly been complied with by PW-8, the officer who conducted the search.
According to the learned counsel for the appellant the searching officer
should have told the person who was subjected to search that he had a right to
be searched in the presence of a gazetted officer or a Magistrate. In this
case PW-8 has deposed that she told the appellant that if he wished he could
be searched in the presence of the gazetted officer or a Magistrate to which
the appellant had not favourably reciprocated. According to us the said offer
is a communication about the information that the appellant has a right to be
searched so. It must be remembered that the searching officer had only Section
50 of the Act then in mind unaided by the interpretation placed on it by the
Constitution Bench. Even then the searching officer informed him that "if you
wish you may be searched in the presence of a gazetted officer or a
Magistrate". This according to us is in substantial compliance with the
requirement of Section 50. We do not agree with the contention that there was
non-compliance with the mandatory provision contained in Section 50 of the
Act".

(Underlined for emphasis) Though, learned counsel for the appellants submitted
that this was a case where the Court erroneously held that substantial
compliance would be sufficient, we find that the underlined portion is what
was held by the Court to be information of the right. The offer in the present
case is almost a replica of what was said in that case.

Though there cannot be any quarrel with the general principle highlighted by
learned counsel for the appellants that if a thing is required to be done in a
particular way it should be done in that way, the position here is different
in view of our conclusions that the requirements of Section 50 of the Act were
sufficiently complied with. The general principle as noted has been stated
illuminatingly in Nazir Ahmad v. King-Emperor (AIR 1936 P.C. 253), and later
by this Court in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Singhara Singh and Ors. (1964 (4)
SCR 485). What the concerned officer is required to do is to convey about the
choice the accused had. The accused (suspect) has to be told in a way that he
becomes aware that the choice is his and not of the concerned officer, even
though there is no specific form. The use of the word 'right' at relevant
places in the decision of Baldev Singh's case (supra) seems to be to lay
effective emphasis that it is not by the grace of the officer the choice has
to be given but more by way of a right in the 'suspect' at that stage to be
given such a choice and the inevitable consequences that have to follow by
transgressing it.

The use of the expression 'substantial compliance' was made in the background
that the searching officer had Section 50 in mind and it was unaided by the
interpretation placed on it by the Constitution Bench in Baldev Singh's case
(supra). A line or a word in a judgment cannot be read in isolation or as if
interpreting a statutory provision, to impute a different meaning to the
observations.

Above being the position, we find no substance in the plea that there was non-
compliance with the requirements of Section 50 of the Act.

It was pleaded that the requirements of Section 57 have not been complied
with. There was no material placed either before the trial Court or the High
Court to substantiate such a plea. The grievance in this regard does not merit
any consideration, leave alone the impact of it on the guilt and conviction of
the accused.

Additionally, it may also be noticed that while giving statement under Section
313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short the 'Code'), the
accused did not say that he was unaware of his rights or that he was misled on
that account in any manner. On the contrary, in general and vague manner it
was only said that he did not know or he had no idea of the allegations.
Though that by itself is not sufficient to convict accused, in view of the
procedural safeguards required to be observed by compliance with the
requirements of Section 50, yet that is of some relevance in appreciating the
grievance, now sought to be ventilated. There is no infirmity in the impugned
judgment to warrant interference. The appeals are accordingly dismissed.

