

Calcutta High Court

Vijaya Minerals Private Limited vs Bikash Chandra Deb & Anr on 22 February,
2016

    
    
    OD-1
                                       GA No. 3420 of 2015
                                       CS No. 128 of 2007
    
                              IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
    
                               Ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction
    
                                         ORIGINAL SIDE
    
    
    
    
                              VIJAYA MINERALS PRIVATE LIMITED
                                           Versus
                                 BIKASH CHANDRA DEB & ANR.
    
    
      BEFORE:
    
      The Hon'ble JUSTICE SANJIB BANERJEE

Date : 22nd February, 2016.

Appearance:

Mr. S. B. Mukherjee, Sr. Adv.

Mr. R. Banerji, Sr. Adv.

Mr. S. Mitra, Adv.

Mr. T. Aich, Adv.

The Court : Pursuant to the order dated January 29, 2016, Advocate for the
first defendant had attempted to serve a covering letter along with the copy
of the papers pertaining to this petition on the plaintiff at Esplanade
Mansion, 14, Government Place (East), a short distance from this Court.

The plaintiff could not be found at the address and the affidavit of service
claims that there is no existence of the plaintiff at the relevant address. In
terms of the default clause contained in the order of January 29, 2016, a
notice has been published in "The Statesman" on February 6, 2016. The notice
indicated that the matter would appear on February 19, 2016.

2

This petition duly appeared in the list on February 19, 2016 and was taken up,
but since the plaintiff was not represented, the matter was directed to stand
over till today.

Pursuant to an order dated February 8, 2008, the first defendant made the
deposit of a sum of Rs.1.50 crore with advocate for the plaintiff. However,
the plaintiff does not appear to have taken much interest in the suit
thereafter. The relevant interlocutory application, GA No.2030 of 2007, was
dismissed for default by an order of May 10, 2011 and the interim order
subsisting thereon was vacated. The order dated May 10, 2011 left it open to
the first defendant "to take out an application for refund of the amount
deposited by the first defendant that now remains with advocate representing
the plaintiff."

A further order of July 26, 2011 recorded the submission of advocate formerly
representing the plaintiff. Advocate for the plaintiff had been appointed
receiver for the purpose of holding the sum of Rs.1.50 crore. The amount was
directed to be invested in a short-term fixed deposit. The order of July 26,
2011 recorded the submission of advocate for the plaintiff that he had no
instructions in the matter. The order required the receiver to deposit the
entire amount of about Rs.1.75 crore together with the interest accrued
thereon with the Registrar, Original Side and for the receiver to stand
discharged thereupon. The deposit has been made with the Registrar, Original
Side.

The present petition is for a direction on the Registrar to make over the
entire amount held by the Registrar to the first defendant since the suit has
been dismissed by an order of September 12, 2012.

Since the plaintiff has shown no interest in the matter despite attempts of
service at the plaintiff's recorded address and the publication of the notice
in the  3 newspaper pursuant to the order dated January 29, 2016, GA No.3420
of 2015 is allowed by directing the Registrar, Original Side to make over the
deposit of about Rs.1.75 crore together with the interest accrued thereon to
the first defendant by way of a demand draft of any nationalised bank made out
in the name of the first defendant. The entire payment will be made within
four weeks from date, upon the Registrar retaining the usual commission.

It is made clear that this order is only for the purpose of the refund of the
amount and it will be open to the first defendant to pursue any other remedy
against the plaintiff in accordance with law.

There will be no order as to costs.

Urgent certified website copies of this order, if applied for, be supplied to
the parties subject to compliance with all requisite formalities.

(SANJIB BANERJEE, J.) bp.

