

Delhi High Court

Amazon Seller Services Pvt Ltd vs Modicare Ltd & Ors on 31 January, 2020

    
    
    $~
    *             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                            Reserved on: 21st December, 2019
                                            Pronounced on: 31st January, 2020
    
    +              FAO(OS) 133/2019 and CM APPL. 32954/2019 (stay)
    AMAZON SELLER SERVICES PVT. LTD.                     ..... Appellant
                     Through: Mr. Saikrishna Rajagopal with Mr.
                              Sidharth Chopra, Ms. Sneha Jain, Ms.
                              Sauni Dutt, Mr. Devvrat Joshi, Ms.
                              Surabhi Pande, Ms. Nilofar Absar, Ms.
                              Abhiti Vaccher and Mr. Vivek
                              Ayyagari, Advocates.
                     versus
    AMWAY INDIA ENTERPRISES PVT. LTD. & ORS.        ..... Respondents
                     Through: Mr. Parag Tripathi, Senior Advocate
                              with Ms. Priya Kumar, Mr. Shailabh
                              Tiwari, Mr. C.D. Mulherkar, Mr.
                              Chanakya Deviedi, Mr. Tejas Chhabra,
                              Mr. Anand Chichra, Mr. Arjun
                              Maheshwari, Mr. Kunal Dhawan and
                              Mr. Lalltaksh Joshi, Advocates for R-1.
    
    +              FAO(OS) 134/2019 and CM APPL. 32956/2019 (stay)
    AMAZON SELLER SERVICES PVT. LTD.                      ..... Appellant
                      Through: Mr. Saikrishna Rajagopal with Mr.
                                 Sidharth Chopra, Ms. Sneha Jain, Ms.
                                 Savni Dutt, Mr. Devvrat Joshi, Ms.
                                 Surabhi Pande, Ms. Nilofar Absar,
                                 Ms. Abhiti Vaccher and Mr. Vivek
                                Ayyagari, Advocates.
                      versus
    ORIFLAME INDIA PVT. LTD. & ORS.                  ..... Respondents
                      Through: Mr. Balbir Singh, Sr. Advocate with
                                 Mr. Mahesh B. Chhibber and
                                 Ms. Monica, Advocates for R1.
    FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters                          Page 1 of 69
     +      FAO(OS) 135/2019 and CM APPL. 32958/2019 (stay)
    AMAZON SELLER SERVICES PVT. LTD.                  ..... Appellant
                     Through: Mr. Saikrishna Rajagopal with Mr.
                              Sidharth Chopra, Ms. Sneha Jain, Ms.
                              Savni Dutt, Mr. Devvrat Joshi, Ms.
                              Surabhi Pande, Ms. Nilofar Absar, Ms.
                              Abhiti Vaccher and Mr. Vivek
                              Ayyagari, Advocates.
                     versus
    MODICARE LTD. & ORS.                                          .... Respondent
                      Through:             Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Sr.Advocate with
                                           Ms. Pooja Dodd, Mr. Vinay Tripathi,
                                           Mr. Saksham Dhingra, Mr. Aman
                                           Singhal, Ms. Aditi Menon, Ms. Ketal
                                           Paul, Mr. Tushar Bhushan, Mr.
                                           Amartya Bhushan and Mr. Ayush
                                           Samaddar, Advocates.
    +      FAO(OS) 141/2019 and CM APPL. 34228//2019 (stay)
    CLOUDTAIL INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED                        ..... Appellant
                      Through: Mr. Gurukrishna Kumar, Sr. Advocate
                               with Mr. Nischal Anand and Mr. Praful
                               Shukla, Advocates.
                      Versus
    AMWAY INDIA ENTERPRISES PRIVATE LIMITED &
    ORS.                                              ..... Respondents
                      Through: Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, Sr. Advocate
                               with Ms. Priya Kumar, Mr. Shailabh
                               Tiwari, Mr. C.D. Mulherkar,
                               Mr. Chanakya Deviedi, Mr. Tejas
                               Chhabra, Mr. Anand Chichra,
                               Mr. Arjun Maheshwari,Mr. Kunal
                               Dhawan and Mr. Lalltaksh Joshi,
                               Advocates for R1.
                               Mr. Saikrishna Rajagopal with Mr.
                               Sidharth Chopra, Ms. Sneha Jain, Ms.
    
    FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters                              Page 2 of 69
                                            Savni Dutt, Mr. Devvrat Joshi, Ms.
                                           Surabhi Pande, Ms. Nilofar Absar,
                                           Ms. Abhiti Vaccher and Mr. Vivek
                                           Ayyagari, Advocates for R-4
    
    +          FAO(OS) 142/2019 and CM APPL. 34230/2019 (stay)
           CLOUDTAIL INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED                  ..... Appellant
                         Through: Mr. Gurukrishna Kumar, Sr. Advocate
                                    with Mr. Nischal Anand and Mr. Praful
                                    Shukla, Advocates.
                         versus
    
           ORIFLAME INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED & ORS.       ..... Respondents
                        Through:  Mr. Balbir Singh, Sr. Advocate with
                                  Mr. Mahesh B. Chhibber and Ms.
                                  Monica, Advocates for R1.
                                  Mr. Saikrishna Rajagopal with Mr.
                                  Sidharth Chopra, Ms. Sneha Jain, Ms.
                                  Savni Dutt, Mr. Devvrat Joshi, Ms.
                                  Surabhi Pande, Ms. Nilofar Absar,
                                  Ms. Abhiti Vaccher and Mr. Vivek
                                  Ayyagari, Advocates for R-6.
    
    +      FAO(OS) 157/2019 and CM APPL. 37244/2019 (stay)
           SNAPDEAL PVT. LTD.                              ..... Appellant
                          Through: Mr. Rajshekhar Rao with Mr. Aditya
                                    Verma, Mr. Shantanu Rawat and
                                    Mr. Siddharth Rawal and Mr.
                                    Chaitanya, Advocates.
                          Versus
    
           AMWAY INDIA ENTERPRISES PVT. LTD. & ORS... Respondents
                        Through: Ms. Priya Kumar with Ms. Priya
                                 Adlakha, Ms. Tulip De, Mr. Ashish
                                 Sharma, Ms. Ruhee Passi and Mr.
                                 Tejas Chabra, Advocates.
    
    
    FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters                           Page 3 of 69
     CORAM: JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
           JUSTICE TALWANT SINGH
    
                                           JUDGMENT
    

Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.:

Introduction

1\. These are six appeals directed against the same impugned common judgment
dated 8th July, 2019 passed by the learned Single Judge in interlocutory
applications filed in the corresponding suits by the Respondents in these
appeals. By the said judgment, the learned Single Judge has injuncted the
Appellants from selling the goods of the Respondents, who claim to be Direct
Selling Entities (‗DSEs') in terms of the Model Framework for Guidelines on
Direct Selling dated 26th October, 2016 i.e. Direct Selling Guidelines
(‗DSGs'), on the Appellants' e-commerce platforms.

2\. Three of the present appeals i.e. FAO (OS) 133/2019, 134/2019 and 135/2019
are by Amazon Seller Services Private Limited (‗Amazon') against Amway India
Enterprises Private Limited (‗Amway'), Oriflame India Private Limited
(‗Oriflame') and Modicare Limited (‗Modicare'), respectively. Two of the
appeals, FAO (OS) 141/2019 and 142/2019 are by Cloudtail India Private Limited
(‗Cloudtail') against Amway and Oriflame respectively. The sixth appeal i.e.
FAO (OS) 157/2019 is by Snapdeal Private Limited (‗Snapdeal') against Amway.

3\. Since common questions of law arise from the impugned judgment of the
learned Single Judge and the pleadings in the corresponding suits, they are
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 4 of 69 being disposed of by this
judgment.

4\. At the outset, it is required to be noticed that the parties before the
Court have categorically stated that the suits filed by the Respondents and
the corresponding appeals before this Court are not to be considered as
arising out of ―commercial disputes‖, falling within the purview of the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (‗CCA'). They have accordingly been heard by this
Bench, which is otherwise not authorised to hear appeals which are to be heard
by the Commercial Appellate Division of this Court in terms of the CCA.

Facts in Amazon's appeals

5\. Amway is engaged in the manufacture and distribution business of its
healthcare, wellness, cosmetic, and home products through a business model
called the Direct Selling Business Model (‗DSBM'). The products offered for
sale by Amway include moisturizers, creams, lipsticks, detergents, surface
cleaners, shaving creams, deodorants etc. Amway claims that it has given an
undertaking to the Government of India (‗GoI') to abide by the DSGs in the
conduct of its business. Amway also sells its products on its own online
market place, www.amway.in.

6\. Amway is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Amway Corporation, now known as
Alticor Inc., headquartered at Ada, Michigan, USA. The parent company which
was founded in 1959 applied to the Ministry of Industry, GoI in June, 1994 for
setting up a wholly owned subsidiary to replicate the ―Amway Model‖, proposing
to ―establish and develop a direct selling business of products which shall be
sourced from local independent Indian manufacturers FAO(OS) 133/2019 &
connected matters Page 5 of 69 particularly small scale units by providing
technology support to products of international standard‖.

7\. After the GoI granted its approval to Amway Corporation by an order dated
26th August, 1994 to commence operations in India as a DSE in terms of its
proposal, Amway came to be incorporated on 3rd August, 1995. On 4th August,
2004, GoI granted approval to Amway to set up its own manufacturing facilities
for manufacture of personal care and cosmetic products and to also import
fragrances, shampoos, lotions, body firming gels, scrubs etc. This was made
subject to the conditions which inter-alia were that Amway would not undertake
domestic retail trading in any form and that the imports would be in
accordance with the prevailing Export-Import (‗EXIM') policy. Amway obtained a
licence from the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (‗FSSAI') in
terms of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (‗FSS Act') and the Food Safety
and Standards Regulation, 2011 (‗FSS Regulation').

8\. Amway Corporation is stated to be a member of the World Federation of
Direct Selling Associations (‗WFDSA') and is stated to operate in more than
100 countries and territories worldwide. Explaining the DSBM, Amway states
that such a model offers an ―unparalleled opportunity‖ to Indian customers ―to
own and operate their own business by enrolling themselves as a Direct Seller‖
with Amway and sell its ―high-quality consumer products on a principal-to-
principal basis under a Direct Seller Contract‖. In terms of the said
contract, the Direct Sellers undertake ―the sale, distribution and marketing
of ‗Amway Products' and services and to register as Preferred FAO(OS) 133/2019
& connected matters Page 6 of 69 Customers‖. Amway claims to have provided
opportunities to about 5,00,000 active independent Amway Direct Sellers. It
provides training to such Direct Sellers and Distributors and also offers a
digital learning portal for Amway Business Owners (‗ABOs').

9\. Amway claims that it has a ―Code of Ethics‖ for Amway Direct Sellers. All
products of Amway are stated to be marked with an express declaration that
they are ―sold only by Amway Business Owners‖.

10\. According to Amway, its products bear a ―unique code‖. This is stated to
be located on the ―upper surface of the cap of the product packaging‖ which
allows Amway ―to track the distributor channel, selling the said product to an
end customer‖. The imprinting of these unique codes is stated to ensure
prevention of the circulation and sale of any counterfeit Amway products
through unauthorized trade channels. According to Amway, the trust of its
Direct Sellers and their customers receives the highest attention and it has a
―Customer Product Refund Policy‖, covering all Amway Products, which allows a
customer who is not completely satisfied, to return the product within 30 days
of the purchase of invoice/delivery. This refund policy is applicable to
―products in saleable condition, and partially used products (30%) accompanied
with an invoice‖. According to Amway, it has a nationwide presence with 130
sales offices, 4 regional warehouses, 3 regional hubs and 34 city warehouses
catering to over 8900 pin codes across the country. It is the founder member
of the Indian Direct Sellers Association (‗IDSA') which is stated to be an
―autonomous self-regulatory body for the direct selling industry in India‖.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 7 of 69

11\. According to Amway, the DSGs are stated to have been issued by the
notification dated 26th October, 2016 of the Department of Consumer Affairs at
the request of IDSA in order to prevent fraud and to protect the rights and
interests of consumers.

12\. The central issue highlighted in Amway's Suit CS (OS) 480/2018 filed in
this Court against Pioneering Products, and Black Olive Enterprises (Defendant
Nos. 1 and 2 respectively) who are sellers on Amazon's online platform,
Cloudtail (Defendant No. 3) another seller on Amazon's platform and stated to
be an ―affiliate/associate company of Amazon‖, and Amazon (Defendant No. 4),
was that Amway cannot sell its products through channels of e-commerce/online
portals or mobile apps. According to Amway, sale of its products through any
e-commerce or online portal in the absence of a written contract with Amway,
is unauthorised both in terms of its ―Code of Ethics‖ as well as clause 7 (6)
of the DSGs. Amway claims that it has not provided any written consent to any
of its Direct Sellers to undertake or solicit sale, or offer its products
through third party e-commerce websites/ mobile apps. Amway is unable to
guarantee the authenticity and quality of such products which are purchased
from unauthorised sources and its product refund policy does not apply to such
unauthorised purchases.

13\. Amway claims that it received complaints from its Direct Sellers that
Amway products were being sold on various e-commerce/online portals or mobile
apps and wholesale and retail shops illegally at unwarranted discounts
resulting in a decline in the sales of the Amway's Direct Sellers. The further
allegation was that such unauthorised sellers registered on the e-commerce
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 8 of 69 platforms/shops were
removing the unique code imprinted on Amway products to avoid the distributor
channel from being identified or tracked.

14\. According to Amway, it learnt sometime in September, 2017 that Amazon is
offering for sale Amway products on its e-commerce portal/website,
―www.amazon.in‖ and its mobile application ―Amazon Online Shopping‖ without
its permission or knowledge. A snapshot of the website of Amazon incorporated
in the plaint revealed that Amway's ―Nutrilite Daily- 120N tablets‖ were being
offered for sale on the said website. It is stated that such a sale on
Amazon's online platform was unauthorised, since it was without the leave,
permission or licence of Amway, which has till date not authorised anyone to
sell or advertise its products on Amazon's Online Platform. It was averred in
the plaint that this was in direct violation of the Clause 7 (6) of the DSGs,
which states :

> "Any person who sells or offers for sale, including on an e-commerce
> platform/ marketplace, any product or service of a Direct Selling Entity
> must have prior written consent from the respective Direct Selling Entity in
> order to undertake or solicit such sale or offer."

15\. It was further averred in the plaint that Amway's products were being
sold by the Defendants at much cheaper prices than the market price and that
this cast ―serious doubts‖ on the authenticity of Amway's products sold by the
Defendants. It was claimed that Amway ―has been facing huge financial losses
on account of the illegal activities of the Defendants.‖

16\. On 22nd September, 2017, Amway sent a cease and desist notice to Amazon,
asking it ―to remove reference to any statement/advertising/display FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 9 of 69 of ‗Amway products' from its
website.‖

17\. Amazon is stated to have replied to Amway by a letter dated 11 th
October, 2017, denying Amway's contentions and emphasizing that it merely
provided an online platform for sale of various consumer goods and products by
different registered sellers/vendors; that it did not monitor or control the
transactions occurring on its website or mobile application, and that Amway
could initiate action against its vendors/sellers, who were engaged in selling
Amway products online without its authority or consent or selling spurious and
counterfeit products under its name. According to Amway, Amazon's stand was
contrary to Amazon's ―exclusion policy‖ that did not allow on its online
portal the sale of products by a person in the following situations: ―who is
not (a) the "authorized reseller" (as designated by the manufacturer or
distributor; or (b) where the manufacturer's standard warranty is not being
provided to the consumer; or (c) where the product is placed on the market
without the consent of the relevant brand or trademark owner.‖

18\. Amway sent another notice dated 6th November, 2017 to Amazon refuting the
averments made by Amazon in their reply dated 11th October, 2017. Amway
contended that Amazon was ―actively involved‖ in the sale of its products and
was ―providing services such as helping sellers manage their accounts,
increase visibility, discoverability and sale of products, listing of products
etc‖. According to Amway, Amazon was also publishing advertisements in the
print media offering Amway products on its online portal.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 10 of 69

19\. Amway states that Amazon and its affiliates were not acting merely as
―intermediaries‖, but were actively involved in the sale of Amway products.
This averment is in the context of Amazon contending that it falls within the
definition of an ―intermediary‖ under Section 2 (1) (w) of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 (‗IT Act') and that subject to Section 79 (2) and (3)
thereof, it would under Section 79 (1) be exempt from any liability arising
out of content uploaded by third parties such as sellers on Amazon's online
platform ―www.amazon.in‖. Amazon also refers to the Information Technology
(Intermediary Guidelines) Rules, 2011 (‗Intermediary Guidelines') which
requires due diligence to be undertaken by intermediaries, which Amazon claims
to have complied with.

20\. In the plaint it is averred that on 21st September, 2018 Amway's
representative purchased the Amway products from Amazon's website.

21\. Further, a reference was made to the fact that by an order dated 1st
June, 2018 in CS (OS) 297/2018 filed by Amway against ―some identified and
unidentified medical shops/pharmacist in Bhagirath Palace, Delhi‖, this Court
had granted an ad interim injunction and John Doe order against all the
Defendants in the said suit. The Court also appointed four Local Commissioners
(‗LCs') and during raids it was found that Amway products worth lakhs of
rupees with or without unique codes had been seized in the shops of such
Defendants. Reference is also made to two other Civil Suits being CS (OS)
410/2018 and 453/2018 filed by Amway against two online aggregators/market
places, in which an interim injunction restraining those online market places
from selling Amway's products, without its prior FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected
matters Page 11 of 69 authorisation, was passed. The LCs appointed in those
suits were also asked to make an inventory of the Amway products being sold,
to seal them and return them on superdari.

22\. The prayers in CS (OS) 480/2018, inter-alia were for a decree of
permanent injunction restraining the Defendants ―from in any manner
purchasing, possessing, selling, distributing, offering for sale, advertising/
displaying Plaintiff's 'Amway products' on the website of Defendant No. 4 i.e.
www.amazon.in and mobile application "Amazon Online Shopping" or any other
website/mobile application or any other portal without the prior written
consent of the Plaintiff.‖

23\. The prayer against Amazon apart from the above reliefs, was for a
permanent injunction restraining Amazon, its ―Directors, vendors, sellers,
agents, affiliates, servants, licensees, franchisees, representatives and
employees or any one claiming under them, directly or indirectly, from in any
manner purchasing, possessing, selling, distributing, offering for sale,
advertising/ displaying Plaintiffs 'Amway products' from its website
www.amazon.in and mobile application "Amazon Online Shopping" or any other
platform, without the prior written consent of the Plaintiff.‖

24\. The further incidental prayer was for a direction to the Defendants to
―disclose the details of the distributors/dealers/Direct-Sellers of the
Plaintiff from whom they are procuring the ‗Amway products' or any other
person or entity involved in such unauthorised transaction of ‗Amway
products'‖. The final prayer in the plaint was for a decree of damages in the
sum of Rs.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 12 of 69

2,00,01,000/- together with interest at 18% per annum thereon from the date of
filing of the suit till its realisation apart from unquantified punitive
damages.

25\. At the first hearing of the suit i.e. CS (OS) 480/2018 on 26th September,
2018, the learned Single Judge passed an order granting an interim injunction
restraining the Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 not to offer for sale any of the
products in the Amway range either through the website ―www.amazon.in‖ or
through their mobile application. Further if the same were genuine products,
Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 were permitted to approach Amway to establish the same,
and if they were able to obtain Amway's written approval then ―they may be
permitted to sell the products.‖ As far as Amazon was concerned, it was noted
in the order that its counsel had agreed to take down Amway listings from the
online platform. It was accordingly directed that Amazon shall within three
days, pull down all Amway listings on both the e-commerce platform and the
mobile application and confirm the same to Amway through the counsel. It was
stated that ―the question as to whether the e-commerce platform is liable in
such situations and whether the doctrine of exhaustion would apply, would be
gone into on the next date of hearing‖.

26\. By the same order, the learned Single Judge disposed of IA No. 13160/
2018 by appointing four LCs to visit the premises of Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 and
directing them to ―make an inventory and take into custody all impugned
products, including packaging, labels, stationery, hoardings and other
materials bearing the mark ―AMWAY‖. The LCs were authorised to seal the
impugned products and return them on superdari after obtaining undertakings
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 13 of 69 of the respective
Defendants.

27\. The four LCs so appointed, submitted their respective reports to the
Court on 6th, 12th, 15th and 16th October, 2018 respectively. Amazon filed an
additional affidavit dated 31st May, 2019. The applications were heard along
with similar applications in the other connected suits.

28\. The interim injunction applications in the suits were heard on 13 dates
between 10th January, 2019 and 30th May, 2019 on which date judgment was
reserved. The impugned judgment was thereafter pronounced on 8th July, 2019
granting the relief as noticed hereinbefore.

29\. As far as the other two appeals of Amazon are concerned, FAO (OS) 134/
2019 arises out of the suit CS (OS) 91/2019 filed by Oriflame against six
Defendants of which Defendant Nos. 1 to 5 were registered sellers on Amazon.
This included Cloudtail as Defendant No. 1 and Defendant No. 6 was Amazon
itself.

30\. This suit was first listed on 14th February, 2019 when an order on
similar terms as the interim order dated 26th September, 2018 in the Amway
Suit [CS (OS) No. 480/2018] was passed. The suit of Oriflame was based
entirely on the DSGs, claiming that the said guidelines have the force of law.

31\. At this stage of the case, Ms. Maninder Acharya, learned Additional
Solicitor General of India (‗ASG') appeared and submitted that the Direct
Selling Guidelines ―have to be followed though they are advisory in nature‖.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 14 of 69

According to the ASG, guidelines of such nature had been issued ―by various
Ministries and have binding effect under Article 77 of the Constitution.‖ It
was noted by the learned Single Judge in the order dated 14th February, 2019
that an affidavit would be filed in that regard. An interim injunction of
similar nature was issued. It may be noted here that Oriflame too claims that
it is a DSE which is bound by the DSGs and that the sale of its products on
Amazon's online platform without its consent, would be in violation of Clause
7 (6) of the DSGs.

32\. The third appeal by Amazon, i.e. FAO (OS) 135/2019, arises from CS (OS)
75/2019 filed by Modicare which also claims to be a DSE governed by the DSGs.
This suit was filed against Amazon (Defendant No. 1) and two other sellers on
Amazon's platform i.e. Laxmi Enterprises (Defendant No. 2) and Modicare DP
Store (Defendant No. 3). On 5th February, 2019, an order was passed in the
said suit by the learned Single Judge granting interim injunction on the same
lines as the order dated 26 th September, 2018 in CS (OS) 480/2018 filed by
Amway.

Facts concerning appeals by Cloudtail and Snapdeal

33\. The two Appeals by Cloudtail, FAO (OS) 141/2019 & 142/2019 arise from the
aforementioned suits filed against Amazon and the sellers on its platform
which included Cloudtail, by Amway and Oriflame respectively. It is
Cloudtail's case that it too is an ―intermediary‖ in terms of the IT Act and
the Intermediary Guidelines. It too raises questions regarding the legal
binding effect of the DSGs.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 15 of 69

34\. The 6th Appeal is by Snapdeal. It arises out of CS (OS) 453/2018 filed by
Amway against nine Defendants with the ninth Defendant being Jasper Infotech
Private Limited (‗Jasper Infotech') which runs the e-commerce website
―www.snapdeal.com‖. It may be noticed here that the name of Jasper Infotech
has been changed to Snapdeal on 20th March, 2019. Defendant Nos. 1 to 8 in the
suit were sellers on the online platform of Defendant No. 9. Snapdeal too
claims that its operations on its online market place was limited to
facilitating the buying and selling of various goods and services between
independent sellers and independent buyers. In other words, it was acting
merely as an intermediary and did not directly engage in the sale or purchase
of the products.

35\. As far as Snapdeal is concerned, the refrain in its appeal is that in the
impugned judgment, the learned Single Judge has completely omitted to refer to
the contentions of Snapdeal and has made observations vis-a-vis all the
Defendants before it, without referring to the particular facts of the suit
involving Snapdeal. As far as CS (OS) 453/2018 is concerned, it was first
listed for hearing on 14th September, 2018 when an interim injunction was
passed in I.A. No. 12419/2018. LCs were also appointed by the same order.
Snapdeal contended inter alia that the LC found no goods at its premises which
supports its contention that they were never involved in the handling of Amway
products and that further, there was no evidence of any tampered goods of
Amway being sold on Snapdeal's platform.

The Impugned Judgment

36\. At this stage, it requires to be noticed that the impugned judgment of
the FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 16 of 69 learned Single Judge
was passed in seven suits, five of which, i.e. CS (OS) 410/2018, 453/2018,
480/2018, 531/2018 and 550/2018, were filed by Amway and one each, CS (OS)
75/2019 and 91/2019, were filed by Modicare and Oriflame respectively.

37\. It also requires to be noted here that Union of India was not made a
party in any of the suits. However, when the Oriflame Suit CS (OS) 91/2019 was
first listed on 13th February, 2019, the learned Single Judge issued notice to
the learned ASG in order to elicit the stand of Union of India in respect of
the legality and validity of the DSGs, and listed the matter for the following
day i.e. 14th February, 2019 on which date an order was passed which has been
referred to hereinbefore. The impugned judgment reflects that apart from all
other counsel for the private parties, the learned ASG was also heard by the
learned Single Judge.

38\. In para 142 of the impugned judgment the learned Single Judge formulated
the following four issues for determination:

> ―i) Whether the Direct Selling Guidelines, 2016 are valid and binding on the
> Defendants and if so, to what extent?

> ii) Whether the sale of the Plaintiffs' products on e-commerce platforms
> violates the Plaintiffs' trademark rights or constitutes misrepresentation,
> passing off and results in dilution and tarnishes the goodwill and
> reputation of the Plaintiffs' brands?

> iii) Whether e-commerce platforms are "intermediaries" and are entitled to
> protection under the safe harbour provided in Section 79 of the Information
> Technology Act and the Intermediary Guidelines of 2011?

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 17 of 69

> iv) Whether e-commerce platforms such as Amazon, Snapdeal, Flipkart, 1MG,
> and Healthkart are guilty of tortious interference with the contractual
> relationship of the Plaintiffs with their distributors/direct sellers?

> v) What is the relief to be granted?‖

39\. The conclusion of the learned Single Judge in the impugned judgment vis-
a-vis the above issues can be summarised thus:

(i) the Direct Selling Guidelines have been framed in terms of the legal
procedure, and are binding in law. They have been issued and notified in terms
of the Article 77 of the Constitution of India and it is the only document
that regulates the business of Direct Selling;

(ii) the present Appellant/Defendants were found guilty of infringing the
trademarks of the present Respondents/Plaintiffs, of dilution/tarnishment,
passing off, and misrepresentation;

(iii) the Defendants were not merely passive players but in fact, ―massive
facilitators‖ inasmuch as they were providing warehousing, logistical support,
packaging and delivery services; the bare minimum that the Defendants are
required to do to avail the exemption under Section 79 (2) (c) of the IT Act,
would be to observe due diligence required under Section 79 (2) (c);

(iv) the continued sale of the products of the Plaintiffs on the e-commerce
platforms without their consent, results in inducement of breach of contract,
and tortious interference with contractual relationships of the Plaintiffs
with their distributors;

(v) the balance of convenience lies in the favour of the Plaintiffs; the
online platforms were unable to establish that the products of the Plaintiffs
sold thereon were ―genuine and not tampered with or impaired‖.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 18 of 69

40\. The learned Single Judge further concluded that the DSGs were binding in
nature since ―they do not impinge on any fundamental rights of either the
sellers or the platforms.‖ It was concluded that if the online platforms were
permitted to violate the DSGs, the DSEs would be left with no remedies to
enforce a binding law. The DSGs having been authenticated by a Gazette
notification were binding on e-commerce platforms and sellers on such
platforms. It was held that the online platforms were aware that they were
bound to enforce the said guidelines which reflected the current public policy
and that the online platforms had ―deliberately chosen to only set up the
alleged illegality and non-binding nature of these guidelines only by way of
defence.‖

41\. In coming to the above conclusion the learned Single Judge referred to
the decisions in Bijoe Emmanuel v. State of Kerala (1986) 3 SCC 615 hereafter
('Bijoe Emmanuel'), Union of India v. Naveen Jindal (2004) 2 SCC 510, Gulf
Goans Hotels Company Limited v. Union of India (2014) 10 SCC 673, Delhi
International Airport Limited v. International Lease Finance Corporation
(2015) 8 SCC 446, New Delhi Municipal Council v. Tanvi Trading and Credit
Private Limited (2008) 8 SCC 765, Union of India v. Moolchand Khairati Ram
Trust AIR 2018 SC 5426, U. Unichoyi v. State of Kerala AIR 1962 SC 12; Indian
Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited v. Punjab Drugs Manufacturers Association
(1999) 6 SCC 247 and Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Limited v. Union of India (1996)
10 SCC 104 and the decision of this Court in Zalam Singh v. Union of India ILR
(1985) 2 Del

909\. FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 19 of 69

42\. The learned Single Judge also distinguished the decisions in G.J.
Fernandez v. State of Mysore AIR 1967 SC 1753, Syndicate Bank v. Ramachandran
Pillai (2011) 15 SCC 398 and the decision dated 23rd April, 2019 of the Bombay
High Court in Commercial Suit IP No.114/2018 (Tips Industries v. Wynk Music
Limited) in their applicability to the case at hand.

43\. On the second question of whether the sale of the Plaintiffs' products by
the Defendants violated the Plaintiffs' trademark rights, the learned Single
Judge opened the discussion by observing in para 175 of the impugned judgment
that the Plaintiffs in each of the suits i.e Amway, Modicare and Oriflame ―are
the owners of their respective trademarks.‖ The Defendants were found guilty
of infringing the above trademarks and diluting it and passing off as their
own misrepresenting their association with Amway, Oriflame and Modicare. It
was concluded that the principles of exhaustion in terms of Section 30 of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 (‗TM Act') did not exempt the Defendants from liability
thereunder and the manner of sale on the e- commerce platforms also
constituted passing off, misrepresentation and dilution/tarnishment of the
products and business of the Plaintiffs.

44\. It was held by learned Single Judge that the condition imposed by the
Plaintiffs on the buyers of their products restricting post-sale alienation on
an online market place without their consent, was an enforceable condition and
that the Defendants should be restrained in terms thereof from offering any of
their products including genuine and untampered ones on their online market
places. It was held that the services provided by the online platforms
amounted to infringement under Sections 29 (6) and 29 (8) of the TM Act;

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 20 of 69

that the manner of information provided for each listing on the websites of
Amazon and Snapdeal could cause confusion amongst the consumers thereby
misrepresenting an association of the online market place with the brand of
product. It was further held that the Plaintiffs had legitimate reasons to
restrict resale of the products under Section 30 (4) of the TM Act.

45\. On the basis of the reports of the LCs, the learned Single Judge
concluded that there was large scale tampering of the products of the
Plaintiffs; there was a change of warranty of such products and that such
products were re- packaged and re-sealed by the online market places. Since
the source of the goods sold on the online market places were not easily
determinable, they were not lawfully acquired in terms of Section 30 (3) of
the TM Act.

46\. The learned Single Judge noted the contention of the Defendants that the
suits were not based on violation of trade mark rights and observed that
―While it may be true that the plaints are not structured like a traditional
trademark plaint would be, the same does not mean that the Plaintiffs do not
complain of violations of trademark rights.‖ It was further observed that:

> ―The allegations in the plaint are clearly based on provisions akin to
> misrepresentation in the context of passing off and dilution, as also
> violation of trademark rights as stipulated and protected under Section 29
> of the Trade Marks Act, 1999. Moreover, the defence of Section 30 has been
> set up by the Defendants only because they are aware that if the said
> defence fails, the use of the Plaintiffs' marks results in infringement.‖

47\. In arriving at the above conclusion the learned Single Judge discussed
and distinguished the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Kapil
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 21 of 69 Wadhwa v. Samsung
Electronics Company Limited MIPR 2012 (3) 0191.

48\. The learned Single Judge distinguished the cases cited by the Defendants
and discussed their inapplicability. These included the decision dated 23rd
May, 2017 in Case No. 2016-1290 (Milo & Gabby v. Amazon.com Inc.), Tre Milano,
LLC v. Amazon.com, the decision dated 24th July, 2018 in Civil Action
No.17-2738 (FLW) (LHG) (Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company v. Amazon.com),
Matrix Essential v. Emporium Drug Mart 756 F. Supp. 280 (W.D. La. 1991),
Matrix Essentials v. Emporium Drug Mart 988 F.2d 587 (5th Cir., 1993),
Sebastian Intern v. Long Drug Stores 53 F.3d 1073 (9 th Cir., 1995) and the
decision of the Canadian Supreme Court in Consumers Distributing Company
Limited v. Seiko Time Canada Limited (1984) 1 S.C.R. 583.

49\. The learned Single Judge also relied on the decision dated 3rd July, 2019
of the US Court of Appeals in Case No. 18-1041 (Heather R. Oberdorf v.
Amazon.com Inc), the decision of the European Court of Justice decided on 23rd
April, 2009 in C-59/08 (Copad SA v. Christian Dior Couture SA), the decision
dated 18th December, 2018 of the Court in Milan in G.R. No. 44211/2018
(Landoll S.R.L v. MECS S.R.L) and the decision dated 19th November, 2018 in
G.R. No. 38739/2018 (L'Oreal Italia SPA v. IDS International Drugstore Italia
SPA).

50\. The learned Single Judge held that changes in warranty, refund/return
policies, changes in packaging, removal of codes of the products, and any
other conduct that causes damage to the reputation of the mark and is likely
to FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 22 of 69 undermine the quality of
the mark, would constitute ‗impairment' inasmuch as the online platforms use
the trademarks of the Plaintiffs' products in their advertising, promotion and
sale offers and in the meta-tags, so that the product listings on the
platforms are thrown up on search results. Further, since the Defendants also
provided warehousing, transport and other logistical facilities in the absence
of consent from the Plaintiffs, it would result in a ―clear infringement of
the Plaintiffs' trademarks and the doctrine of exhaustion does not come to the
aid of the Defendants.‖ It was held that the use of the Plaintiffs' marks
clearly constituted ‗use' under Section 2 (2) (c) of the TM Act, 1999. It was
concluded that:

> ―The use of the Plaintiffs' marks clearly constitutes 'use' under Section 2
> (2)(c) of the TM Act, 1999 which is the reason why the platforms obtain
> licenses for the marks from the sellers and warranties that they are
> authorised and that the products are genuine. These licences are themselves
> FAKE because the so- called licensors are not the owners of the marks nor do
> they have any permission to licence the marks. What is not owned cannot be
> licensed. Sellers have no rights if owners have not given consent.‖

51\. The learned Single Judge further held that:

> "The platforms are also indulging in conduct falling under Section 29(6) of
> the Trade Marks Act as they are affixing the marks on the products,
> packaging the same and putting the same in the market for sale. Amazon is
> specifically using the Plaintiffs' mark Amway in advertising, without actual
> knowledge that the said products being sold on its platform are genuine or
> not and whether they are tampered with or not.‖

52\. Reference was made by learned Single Judge to the decision of the
Division Bench of this Court in Baker Hughes Limited v. Hiroo Khushalani
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 23 of 69 (1998) 74 DLT 715, the
decision of the European Court of Justice in Case C- 16/03 (Peak holding AB v.
Axolin-Elinor AB) and the Commentary, Kerly's Law of Trademarks and Trade
Names by James Mellor QC, 15th Edition 2011\. It was concluded by learned
Single Judge that:

> ―On a totality of the facts, it is held that use of the mark by the sellers
> and by the platforms is violative of the Plaintiffs' trademark rights and
> the Defendants' are not entitled to the defence under Section 30. The manner
> of sale on the e-commerce platforms also constitutes passing off,
> misrepresentation and dilution/tarnishment of the Plaintiffs' marks,
> products and businesses.‖

53\. Turning to Issue (iii), the learned Single Judge concluded that the e-
commerce platforms were not merely passive players but ―in fact are massive
facilitators‖ inasmuch as they were providing warehousing, logistical support,
packaging, delivery services, payment services, collection gateways etc.
Reference was made to the FDI Press Note No. 2 of 2018 issued by the GoI in
respect of FDI in e-commerce, and its para 5.2.15.2.2 which defines e-
commerce.

54\. Reference was also made by learned Single Judge to the decisions in
Christian Louboutin SAS v. Nakul Bajaj 2018 (76) PTC 508 (Del) and judgement
of the Supreme Court of India in Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2015) 5 SCC
1, while distinguishing the decision of the Division Bench in My Space Inc. v.
Super Cassettes India Limited (2017) 236 DLT 478 (DB), the decision of the
learned Single Judge of this Court in Kent RO Systems Limited v. Amit Kotak
2017 (69) PTC 551 (Del) and the decision dated 1st May, 2017 of the Division
Bench in FAO (OS) (COMM) 95/2017 FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 24
of 69 (Kent RO Systems Private Limited v. eBay India Private Limited).

55\. In conclusion, on issue (iii), the learned Single Judge held as under:

> ―304. The question as to how the platforms are providing the value-added
> services and whether they are performing an active role in the same, would
> have to be finally adjudicated at trial. However, the bare minimum that they
> would be required to do to avail the exemption under Section 79(2)(c), would
> be to observe due diligence required under Section 79(2)(c) of the IT Act.

> 305\. Thus, in order for the platforms to continue to enjoy the status of
> intermediaries, subject to adjudication at trial, the due diligence
> requirements would have to be met and complied with, as per the Platforms'
> own policies, and as per the Intermediary Guidelines. 2011. Non-compliance
> with the Platforms' own policies would take them out of the ambit of the
> safe harbour.‖

56\. On the last issue, i.e. issue (iv) regarding tortious interference with
contractual relations, the learned Single Judge observed interalia that:

> ―The companies and entities, which run e-commerce platforms, have a greater
> obligation to maintain the sanctity of contracts, owing to the sheer
> magnitude and size of their operations. When an e-commerce platform is
> notified of existing contracts and violation of the same on its platform,
> the least that the platform would have to do would be to ensure that it is
> not a party, which encourages or induces a breach. The manner, in which e-
> commerce platforms operate, makes it extremely convenient and easy for
> ABOs/distributors/direct sellers to merely procure the products from the
> Plaintiffs and defeat the purpose of the contractual obligations by selling
> in the grey market to unidentified persons, who may, thereafter, put them in
> the e- commerce stream, without any quality controls. In this manner, such
> ABOs/ distributors/ sellers may sell outdated products, expired products,
> damaged products and hide behind the cloak of the platforms themselves.
> Since none of the platforms, except FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters
> Page 25 of 69 IMG, to an extent, are even disclosing the complete details of
> the sellers, they offer a comfortable refuge for parties breaching their
> contracts with the Plaintiffs. This refuge by itself constitutes
> inducement.‖

57\. It was concluded by learned Single Judge that ―the continued sale of the
Plaintiffs' products on the e-commerce platforms, without the consent of the
Plaintiffs, results in inducement of breach of contract, and tortious
interference with contractual relationships of the Plaintiffs with their
distributors.‖

58\. In arriving at the above conclusions, the learned Single Judge referred
extensively to an Article by John Danforth titled ―Tortious Interference with
Contract: A Reassertion of Society's Interest in Commercial Stability and
Contractual Integrity‖ Columbia Law Rev. Vol. 81 No. 7, 1491 and the
Commentary titled ―Salmond & Heuston on the Law of Torts‖, R. F. V. Heuston
and R. A. Buckley, 20th Edition Universal Book Traders at page 358, as well as
the decisions in Aasia Industrial Technologies Limited v. Ambience Space
Sellers Limited (1998) 18 PTC 316 (DB) and the judgment of the learned Single
Judge of the Calcutta High Court in Balailal Mukherjee and Company Private
Limited v. Sea Traders Private Limited (1990) SCC Online Cal 55.

59\. In the concluding portion of the impugned judgment under the title
―Conclusions and Relief‖, it was concluded that the Plaintiffs had established
a prima facie case, that the balance of convenience is in their favour and
that irreparable injury would be caused to the Plaintiffs, their businesses
and all FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 26 of 69 those who depended
on them and finally the consumers, if the interim relief as prayed for was not
granted. It was observed that none of the online platforms were able to
establish that the Plaintiffs' products sold thereon were ―genuine and not
tampered with or impaired.‖ They had also not been able to show how the
licences of the Plaintiffs' marks were granted to the e-commerce platforms.

60\. Some broad observations were made by the learned Single Judge concerning
all the products of the Plaintiffs, by relying on the report of the LCs, in
the following manner:

> ―However, most of the Local Commissioners who have visited the various
> premises of the sellers and the platforms have seen that the products are
> being tampered with by removal of the codes, removal of the inner seal.
> Thinners and glues are being used to remove the codes and the products are
> being re-sealed, may be even under unhygienic conditions. In some cases,
> expired products are being given new manufacturing dates. Such tampering and
> impairment is, clearly, violative of the Plaintiffs' statutory and common
> law rights.‖

61\. On the policies of the online platforms, it was observed by learned
Single Judge as under:

> ―All the platforms have their own policies, which broadly state that they
> respect the Intellectual Property Rights of trademark owners and that upon
> any grievance being raised, they are willing to take down. The Policies of
> all the platforms clearly are simply ‗Paper policies' which are clearly not
> being adhered to as the facts of these cases go to show. They are a mere
> lip-service to the Intermediary Guidelines of 2011. None of the platforms
> are insisting on any of the sellers obtaining consent of the Plaintiffs for
> sale of their products on the e-commerce platforms, where their own policies
> require them to do so. Unless and until, the FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected
> matters Page 27 of 69 sellers are authorized by the Plaintiff, they cannot
> be allowed to sell the Plaintiffs products on Defendant's e-commerce
> platforms.‖

62\. It was further observed by learned Single Judge that:

> "The argument of exhaustion completely fails as there is large- scale
> impairment of the goods as also misrepresentations being made on the
> platforms. Conditions of the goods being sold on the e-commerce platforms
> has been changed. The MRPs are shown to be higher in some cases. Wrong
> attribution of product names is also happening on some of the platforms. The
> source of the products listed on the platforms are suspect. The listings are
> also misleading as they use the Plaintiffs' product images, marks, logos,
> names, etc. giving an impression that the products are sold by the
> Plaintiffs themselves. The consumer is not being told that the seller is not
> authorised by the Plaintiffs, to sell the said products. A consumer would,
> literally, require investigative capabilities to trace the actual seller.‖

63\. On whether the DSGs are considered binding law, and on how the
Plaintiffs' right to carry on business was being affected by the actions of
the Defendants, it was further reiterated by the learned Single Judge that:

> ―324. The Direct Selling Guidelines are law. While the Defendants' platforms
> and sellers insist on their Article 19(l)(g) rights being jeopardised, what
> is lost sight of is the fact that the Plaintiffs' right to carry on business
> is being affected. It is being jeopardized in view of the large-scale
> violations on the e- commerce platforms. Further, the rights of genuine
> consumers are being affected, as is evident from the various comments, which
> consumers have put up on these platforms, after purchasing the Plaintiffs'
> products from the said platforms.

Insofar as the sellers themselves are concerned, many of them have given
undertakings and have agreed for injunctions being passed. The other sellers
who are themselves listed on the platforms have to assume responsibility for
the products and establish that they are genuine. None of them have been able
to FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 28 of 69 establish that the
products are genuine and not tampered with or impaired. They have also not
been able to show as to how they granted licence of the Plaintiffs' marks to
the e-commerce platforms.‖ The present appeals

64\. It requires to be noticed that only some of the Defendants in the above
suits have come forward to file appeals. Amazon, which was Defendant No. 4 in
CS (OS) 480/2018, Defendant No. 1 in CS (OS) 75/2019 and Defendant No. 6 in CS
(OS) 91/2019 has filed three appeals; Cloudtail, which was Defendant No. 3 in
CS (OS) 480/2018 and Defendant No. 2 in CS (OS) 91/ 2019 has filed its two
appeals, and Snapdeal, which was Defendant No. 9 in CS (OS) 453/2018 has filed
the 6th Appeal. The remaining Defendants in the above seven suits have not
challenged the impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge. They have also
not appeared in the present appeals wherever they have been impleaded.

65\. While admitting the appeals on 25th July, 2019 this Court permitted the
parties to file their respective written submissions and listed the interim
applications in the appeals for hearing on 17th February, 2020. Thereafter
applications for advancing of the date of hearing were filed. These
applications were allowed on 30th September, 2019 and the applications for
interim relief were listed for hearing on 9 th October, 2019. Thereafter these
appeals were heard finally on 9th and 15th October, 2019, 5th November and
14th November, 2019, 14th December, 20th December and 21st December, 2019\.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 29 of 69

66\. This Court has heard the submissions of Mr. Gurukrishna Kumar, learned
Senior Counsel appearing for the Cloudtail, Mr. Saikrishna Rajgopal, learned
counsel appearing for Amazon; Mr. Rajshekar Rao learned counsel appearing for
Snapdeal; Mr. Parag Tripathi, learned Senior Counsel and Ms. Priya Kumar,
learned counsel appearing for Amway; Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the Oriflame and Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for Modicare.

Prefatory observations 67.1 The Court would like to preface the discussion on
the issues with brief observations on the nature of the suits themselves. From
the plaints and the suits filed, four to be precise, it is plain that none of
them was filed as a commercial suit, since none of them was framed as a suit
either for passing off or for infringement in terms of the TM Act.

67.2 The second factor to be kept in mind is that in none of the suits was
there any prayer for a declaration that the DSGs are law that bind the
Defendants and that, as such, they are enforceable. Thirdly, there was again
no prayer for a declaration that Amazon and Snapdeal were not ―intermediaries‖
within the meaning of Section 79 of the IT Act. These factors attain
significance in light of the fact that the learned Single Judge has returned
specific findings, which clearly run contrary to the structure and frame of
the suits themselves.

67.3. Another aspect that bears noting is that the impugned judgment runs into
225 pages and returns extensive findings, without expressing any caveat that
such findings may be prima facie or tentative findings, limited for the
purpose FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 30 of 69 of granting interim
relief. The said findings, even on a conservative basis, can be characterized
as expressing a final opinion at an interlocutory stage. The many issues on
which findings were returned are of a nature which necessitate evidence to be
led by the parties and the matter having to go for trial to test the veracity
of the cases of the respective parties. In fact, the issues that have been
framed in the impugned judgement for the purposes of relief appear to travel
far beyond the pleadings in the suits and, in fact, at a stage when the issues
in the suits themselves are yet to be framed.

67.4 Given the nature of the plaints and the prayers made therein, it is
highly unlikely that the issues that were framed by the learned Single Judge
for the purpose of considering the grant of interim reliefs would be the
issues in the suits themselves. For instance, corresponding to the first issue
whether the DSGs are in the nature of binding law there is no prayer in the
suits themselves. It is doubtful, therefore, whether such an issue could have
been framed in the suits . Likewise, in the absence of any prayer declaring
that online platforms like Amazon, Snapdeal and Cloudtail are not
―intermediaries‖ within the meaning of the IT Act, it is unlikely that such an
issue could be framed in the suits.

67.5 There was also no question raised in relation to the constitutional
validity of the DSGs either in the plaints or in the written statements and
affidavits filed by the Appellants/Defendants in their suits and applications
under Order XXXIX, Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (‗CPC').
It is, therefore, surprising that the learned Single Judge has extensively
examined the question of the constitutional validity of the DSGs.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 31 of 69

67.6 The learned Single Judge appears to have taken into account the
submissions of the Union of India, when it was not even a party to any of the
suits. These are suits governed by the CPC. The procedure adopted by the
learned Single Judge in requiring the learned ASG to address arguments on
behalf of the Union of India at an interlocutory stage, without it being party
to the suits themselves, was, therefore, untenable.

67.7 It would be a different matter if the plaints themselves supported the
case that the DSGs are indeed law and an officer of the Union of India was
summoned as a witness in the trial. The Court on its own requiring the Union
of India to address it on this aspect, in a civil suit, is indeed a deviation
from the CPC itself, which would strictly govern the adjudication of civil
suits filed on the original side of this Court. That this Court has original
jurisdiction does not mean under that jurisdiction the Court will assume to
itself the powers of a Writ Court. The flexibility of procedure that may be
available to the Court while dealing with a writ petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution, is not, and ought to not be adopted while dealing with civil
suits filed on the original side, which would be strictly governed by the
provisions of the CPC read with the corresponding provisions of the Delhi High
Court Act and the Original Side Rules of the Delhi High Court.

67.8 In such circumstances, the question of what value the ASG's submission
would have in determining the preliminary issue of the nature of the DSGs is a
question that ought to have been addressed, but was not, by the learned Single
Judge. The view expressed by the ASG before the learned Single FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 32 of 69 Judge on the nature of the DSGs,
can, at best, said to be ‗advisory' and not ‗evidence'.

68\. With these preliminary observations, the Court proceeds to examine each
of the four issues, the conclusions pertaining to which, form the basis of the
impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge.

Are the DSGs law?

69\. The first issue formulated by the learned Single Judge was whether the
DSGs ―are valid and binding on the Defendants, and if so, to what extent‖? It
must be noted at the outset that this issue itself has been erroneously
framed. Even going by the submissions made before the learned Single Judge, or
for that matter before this Court, the question to be addressed was whether
the DSGs were ‗law' and whether suits could have been filed by the Plaintiffs
for enforcing the DSGs?

70\. It is clear from the first line of para 146 of the impugned judgment,
that the stand of the Appellants/Defendants, as noted by the learned Single
Judge, is that ―the DSGs are not law and they are merely advisory in nature‖.
The learned Single Judge notes the further submission that according to the
Defendants, the DSGs were ―merely a model framework for State Governments and
Union Territories to come out with an actual legal mechanism to enforce the
same‖ and that ―they are not binding in nature‖. It is in the next sentence
that the learned Single Judge appears to have committed an error while noting
that the Appellants/ Defendants had urged that the DSGs ―are not law under
Article 13 of the Constitution as they FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters
Page 33 of 69 impinged upon the Fundamental Rights of the platforms and the
sellers of the platforms guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (g) of the
Constitution‖.

71\. It has been repeatedly urged before this Court that this was not the
contention of the Defendants. In particular, it is the case of the Amazon that
they did not in fact challenge the constitutional validity of the DSGs. Their
submission was that these were mere guidelines which could not be
characterized as ‗law' and cannot, therefore, regulate the exercise of the
fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution.

72\. The learned Single Judge appears to have committed an error in re-
phrasing the ―the first and foremost question‖, as ―whether any right under
Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution is impinged by the issuance of these
guidelines‖. What was required to be addressed first was the issue whether the
DSGs were indeed ‗law' and were the suits seeking enforcement of such law be
maintainable?

73\. At this stage, it is important to examine the DSGs. A perusal of the
notification dated 26th October, 2016 issued by the Department of Consumer
Affairs reveals that an Inter-Ministerial Committee (‗IMC') was constituted by
the Government of India with representatives of the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, the Department of Legal
Affairs, the Department of Information and Technology and the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs. Besides these five ministries and departments, the
representatives of the Government of NCT of Delhi, the States of Andhra
Pradesh and Kerala were also part of the said IMC. They were to look into
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 34 of 69 ―the matters concerning the
direct selling industries‖. This IMC is stated to have held consultations with
―stakeholders‖ before formulating the ―model guidelines for the States and the
Union Territories‖ for protecting the ―legitimate rights and interests of
industry and consumers‖. What was envisaged was that ―the State Governments
will set up a mechanism to monitor/supervise the activities of direct sellers,
DSEs regarding compliance for guidelines for direct sellers‖. In other words,
even in terms of this notification, what was being notified were only ―model
guidelines‖.

74\. The model guidelines envisaged a DSE to submit an undertaking to the
Department of Consumer Affairs (‗DoCA) by 9th December, 2016, stating therein
that it was in compliance thereof and was to also provide the details of its
incorporation. The notification urged the State Governments and Union
Territories to take ―necessary action to implement the guidelines‖. Enclosed
with the said notification were ―model guidelines on direct selling English
and Hindi‖ and ―the Performa (sic) for declaration and undertaking‖.

75\. The title of the enclosed document explains its nature: ―Advisory to
State Governments/Union Territories: Model Framework for Guidelines on Direct
Selling‖. Consequently, it is clear that the DSGs were not meant to be treated
as law themselves, much less binding law. It was only to be a model framework
and ―advisory‖ in nature. It was for the State Governments to adopt it into
law. Therefore, Clause 7 (6) of these ‗model guidelines' is also purely
advisory.

76\. The learned Single Judge in the impugned judgment has noticed the FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 35 of 69 background to the formulation of
the guidelines, but crucially overlooked the fact that these were not in the
form of ―executive instructions‖ at all. A careful reading of the notification
reveals that the guidelines have been issued by the DoCA. Its power to frame
such guidelines can be traced back to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986
(‗CPA'). The mere fact that the FSSAI may have written to e-commerce platforms
to comply with the guidelines would not make them law.

77\. Any doubt in this regard now stands dispelled by the communication dated
11th November, 2019 issued by the DoCA in the Ministry of Consumer Affairs
under the subject ―Rules to be notified under the Consumer Protection Act,
2019 - Comments from the stakeholders on draft rules - Reg‖. This has come as
a result of the CPA, 2019, which was published in the official gazette on 9th
August, 2019. The CPA, 2019, itself is yet to become operational, as it is
awaiting the formulation of Rules thereunder.

78\. This communication dated 11th November, 2019 notes that Rules under
various topics are required to be notified under the new Act. Eight such
topics have been notified and in Sl. No. 6 are the ―Consumer Protection
(Direct Selling) Rules, 2019‖. Stakeholders were invited to offer their views
and suggestions on the draft Rules till 2nd December, 2019. A comparison of
the text of draft Consumer Protection (Direct Selling) Rules, 2019 with the
DSGs shows that the former almost entirely replicates the latter. Rule 8 (6)
of the draft Rules, for instance, is a verbatim reproduction of Clause 7 (6)
of the DSGs. Interestingly, even the definition of the ―Act‖ under Rule 2 (1)
(a) is identical to Clause 1 (1) of the Model Direct Selling Guidelines, 2016
and is FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 36 of 69 defined to mean
―CPA‖, with only the year being different; in the DSGs it is CPA, 1986,
whereas in the draft Rules it is CPA, 2019.

79\. Clearly, therefore, what was being invoked was the mechanism of
formulating Rules under an existing statute that governs the subject, viz.,
the CPA. There was no occasion, therefore, to treat these draft DSGs,
traceable as they were to the CPA, as ―executive instructions‖. The learned
Single Judge appears to have missed this significant aspect of the matter. A
large portion of the impugned judgment has been devoted to discussing the case
law around ―executive instructions‖ which filled up the lacuna of the
statutory law on the topic, when there was no occasion to adopt that route to
find the DSGs to be binding.

80\. The learned Single Judge started off by accepting the plea of the ASG
that the DSGs were issued in exercise of the powers conferred under Articles
73 and 77 of the Constitution. Clearly, that is not what the notification
stated. It clearly mentioned these as only ‗guidelines' which were ‗advisory'.
The distinction between rules, which are made under a statute, regulations,
which also ought to be traced to a statute, and mere ‗guidelines', was lost
sight of by the learned Single Judge.

81\. The Plaintiffs appear to have jumped the gun in not waiting for the law
to be formally made and enforced. It is possible that once the CPA Rules are
notified, questions would further arise as to whether such rules, and in
particular Rule 8 (6) thereof violated, as contended by the Appellants/
Defendants, Section 30 of the TM Act or Section 79 of the IT Act. At the
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 37 of 69 stage at which it was
before the learned Single Judge, these questions were moot and purely
hypothetical.

82\. Significantly, had the learned Single Judge addressed the issue whether
the DSGs did in fact have the character of law, there would have been no need
to go into the further issue of whether they violated any fundamental rights.
The route adopted by the learned Single Judge was to first examine the second
question, viz., whether the DSGs violated any fundamental right, and having
answered that in the negative, to conclude that they are accordingly valid and
binding ‗law'.

83\. The learned Single Judge relied on the decision in Ram Jawaya Kapoor
(supra) to conclude that instances of exercise of executive power, where there
was no violation of fundamental rights, ―even if not traceable to a statute‖,
cannot be questioned. The facts that the Supreme Court was confronted with in
that case were that publishers of the text books raised a challenge to certain
executive instructions issued by the State Government. The State Government
took upon itself the task of publishing and printing text books published by
different publishers by giving a mere 5% royalty to the publishers. The action
of the State Government was not, however, traceable to any statute as such.

84\. In the present case, it is not the government, but private entities like
Amway, Oriflame and Modicare, which are trying to seek enforcement of the
DSGs. In fact, they are seeking to enforce guidelines against third parties
and not against those who might be bound by the DSGs, as and when it becomes
law. Merely because the DSGs are notified in the Gazette, they do not attain
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 38 of 69 the status of ―law‖ within
the meaning of Article 13 of the Constitution. The source of the power to
frame such guidelines is traceable only to the CPA. With the CPA, 2019 itself
not having been notified, these draft guidelines could not have attained the
character of ―binding Rules‖ under the CPA, 2019, or for that matter, even
under the CPA, 1986. When clearly even the draft guidelines mentioned the Act
to be the CPA, there was no occasion for the learned Single Judge to accept
the plea that they could be sourced to Articles 73 or 77 of the Constitution
of India. Therefore, there was no occasion to apply the decision in Ram Jawaya
Kapoor (supra).

85\. The fact that the DSGs may not have been challenged in a Court of law is
neither here nor there. If they were not law in the first place, there was no
occasion for the Defendants/Appellants to challenge it. They would be right in
proceeding on the basis that as they were not law in the first place and any
challenge to such draft guidelines would have been premature.

86.1 In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Thakur Bharat Singh AIR 1967 SC 1170, a
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court explained that Articles 162 and 173
were concerned ―primarily with the distinction of executive power between the
Union on the one hand and the States on the other, and not with the validity
of its exercise‖. The decision of the Supreme Court in Ram Jawaya Kapoor
(supra) was explained by the Supreme Court in Thakur Bharat Singh (supra) as
under-

> ―...The executive action which was upheld in that case was, it is true, not
> supported by legislation, but it did not operate to the prejudice of any
> citizen. In the State of Punjab prior to 1950 the text-books used in
> recognized schools were prepared by private FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected
> matters Page 39 of 69 publishers and they were submitted for approval of the
> - Government. In 1950 the State Government published text books in certain
> subjects, and in other subjects the State Government approved text-books
> submitted by publishers and authors. In 1952 a notification was issued by
> the Government inviting only "authors and others" to submit text-books for
> approval by the Government. Under agreements with the authors and others the
> copyright in the text-books vested -absolutely in the State and the authors
> and others received royalty on the sale of those text-

books. The petitioners a firm carrying on the business of preparing, printing,
publishing and selling text books then moved this Court under Art. 32 of the
Constitution praying for writs of mandamus directing the Punjab Government to
withdraw the notifications of 1950 and 1952 on the ground that they
contravened the fundamental rights of the petitioners guarantee under the
Constitution. It was held by this Court that the action of the Government did
not amount to infraction of the guarantee under Art. 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution, since no fundamental rights of the petitioners were violated by
the notifications and the acts of the executive Government done in furtherance
of their policy of nationalisation of text-books for students. It is true that
the dispute arose before the Constitution (seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
amending, inter alia, Art. 298, was enacted, and there was no legislation
authorising the State Government to enter the field of business of printing,
publishing and selling text-books. It was contended in support of the petition
in Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya's case that without legislative authority the
Government of the State could not enter the business of printing, publishing
and selling text-books. The Court held that by the action of the Government no
rights of the petitioners were infringed, since a mere chance or prospect of
having particular customers cannot be said to a be right to property or to any
interest or undertaking. It is clear that the State of Punjab had done no act
which infringed a right of any citizen: the State had merely. entered upon a
trading venture. By entering into competition with the citizens, it did not
infringe their rights. Viewed in the light of these facts the observations
relied upon do not support the contention that the State or its officers may
in exercise of executive authority FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page
40 of 69 infringe the rights of the citizens merely because the Legislature of
the State has the power to legislate in regard to the subject on which the
executive order is. issued.‖ 86.2 Accordingly, in State of Madhya Pradesh v.
Thakur Bharat Singh (supra), it was held that the order issued by the State
Government of Madhya Pradesh under Section 3 (1) (b) of the Madhya Pradesh
Public Security Act, 1959, not only restricted the movements of the
Respondents, but actually required them to move to another place apart from
the place of their ordinary residence, which was beyond the purview of the
statute. This was held to be prejudicial to the Respondents and accordingly
invalid. Therefore, even the extent of executive power could be curtailed by
what the statute permitted expressly.

87\. In Poonam Verma v. Delhi Development Authority (2007) 13 SCC 154, the
question was whether the action of the Central Government to confine the
scheme formulated by the Delhi Development Authority (‗DDA') for out of turn
allotment of flats only for widows of government servants who died in harness
and those who were killed by terrorists could have been validly issued. The
Supreme Court held that the Central Government could not have, in the absence
of any statutory provision directed creation of any quota and that too after
closure of the scheme. In that process, the Supreme Court held that
―guidelines per se do not partake the character of a statute‖ and that ―such
guidelines in absence of statutory backdrop are advisory in nature‖. The Court
referred to its earlier decision in Narender Kumar Maheshwari v Union of India
(1979) 3 SCC 489, where it was held as under:

> ―107. This is because guidelines, by their very nature, do not fall FAO(OS)
> 133/2019 & connected matters Page 41 of 69 into the category of legislation,
> direct, subordinate or ancillary. They have only an advisory role to play
> and non-adherence to or deviation from them is necessarily and implicitly
> permissible if the circumstances of any particular fact or law situation
> warrants the same. Judicial control takes over only where the deviation
> either involves arbitrariness or discrimination or is so fundamental as to
> undermine a basic public purpose which the guidelines and the statute under
> which they are issued are intended to achieve.‖

88\. In G.J. Fernandez v. State of Mysore AIR 1967 SC 1753 the Supreme Court
held that the rules in the Mysore Public Works Department Code did not partake
the character of ‗law' and that Article 162 could not be invoked to recognize
the power of the State Government to frame rules. The provision only indicated
―the scope of executive power of the State‖. It was further explained as
under:

> ―Of course, under such executive power, the State can give administrative
> instructions to its servants how to act in certain circumstances; but that
> will not make such instructions statutory rules which-are justiciable in
> certain circumstances. In order that such executive instructions have the
> force of statutory rules it must be shown that they have been issued either
> under the authority conferred on the State Government by some statute or
> under some provision of the Constitution providing therefore. It is not in
> dispute that there is no statute which confers any authority on the State
> Government to issue rules in matters with which the Code is concerned; nor
> has any provision of the Constitution been pointed' out to us under which
> these instructions can be issued as statutory rules except Art. 162. But as
> we have already indicated, Art. 162 does not confer any authority on the
> State Government to issue statutory rules. It only provides, for the extent
> and scope of the executive power of the State Government, and that coincides
> with the legislative, power of the State legislature. Thus under Art. 162,
> the State Government can take executive action in all matters in which the
> FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 42 of 69 legislature of the State
> can pass laws. But Art. 162 itself does not confer any rule making power on
> the State Government in that behalf. We are therefore of opinion that
> instructions contained in the Code are mere administrative instructions and
> are not statutory rules.‖

89\. The learned Single Judge distinguished the above decision in G.J.
Fernandez (supra) on the ground that the Code in question there was ―in the
nature of government regulations to regulate conduct of employees‖ and that
the said Code was ―not duly notified and gazetted‖ like the DSGs were. The
Court is of the view that the mere fact that the DSGs were notified in the
gazette would not set it apart from the Code that was being considered by the
Supreme Court in G.J. Fernandez.

90\. In Syndicate Bank v. Ramchandran Pillai (2011) 15 SCC 398, the question
that arose was whether the Central Government's ―guidelines to prevent
arbitrary use of powers to evict genuine tenants from public premises under
the control of the public sector undertakings/financial institutions‖ by a
gazetted resolution dated 30th May, 2002, had the force of ―statutory rules‖.
Answering the question in negative, the Supreme Court held as under:

> ―6. If any executive instructions are to have the force of statutory rules,
> it must be shown that they were issued either under the authority conferred
> on the Central Government or a State Government or other authority by some
> Statute or the Constitution. Guidelines or executive instructions which are
> not statutory in character, are not 'laws', and compliance thereof cannot be
> enforced through courts. Even if there has been any violation or breach of
> such non-statutory guidelines, it will not confer any right on any member of
> the public, to seek a direction in a court of law, for compliance with such
> guidelines. An order validly made in accordance with a statute (as in this
> case, the FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 43 of 69 Public Premises
> Act), cannot be interfered with, even if there has been any transgression of
> any guidelines, except where it is arbitrary or malafide or in violation of
> any statutory provision. These are well settled principles (See: Union of
> India v. S.L. Abbas: 1993 (4) SCC 357, Chief Commercial Manager, South
> Central Railway, Secundrabad v. G. Ratnam: 2007 (8) SCC 212, and State of
> U.P. v. Gobardhan Lal)

> 7\. As the guidelines relied upon in this case were not issued in exercise
> of any statutory power under the Public Premises Act or any other statute,
> even if there was violation or non-compliance with the aforesaid guidelines
> by the Appellant, relief to the Appellant could not be denied by relying
> upon the guidelines. To do so would amount to reading the guidelines into
> the statute, which is impermissible? The only 'remedy' of any person
> complaining of noncompliance with such guidelines, is to bring such
> violation, to the notice of a higher authority. We therefore hold that the
> enforcement of any right or exercise of any power by the Appellant, under
> the Public Premises Act cannot be set at naught by relying upon or referring
> to the guidelines issued by the Central Government.‖

91\. Since this Court is of the view that the learned Single Judge was in
error in overlooking the aforementioned legal position, and in holding the
DSGs to be law, the Court does not consider it necessary to examine the
further question whether the DSGs are violative of any fundamental right under
Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution and whether the restriction placed on
the said right by them are beyond the purview of Article 19 (6) of the
Constitution.

92\. The Court, therefore, leaves it open to the Appellants/Defendants to
challenge the Direct Selling Rules under the CPA, once they are notified, as
being violative of Section 30 of the TM Act and Sections 419 and 420 of the
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 44 of 69 Sale of Goods Act, 1930
(‗SOGA'), Sections 23 and 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (‗ICA') and the
Competition Act, 2002. There is no occasion for the Court in the present case
to further examine these issues.

93\. For all the aforementioned reasons, the Court sets aside the findings of
the learned Single Judge on the first issue that the DSGs are ‗law' and that,
as such, they are enforceable.

Trademark issues

94\. The Court now turns to the second issue, and the findings thereon, that
the sale of Amway, Oriflame and Modicare products on e-commerce platforms
amounted to infringement of trademark, passing off and misrepresentation, etc.

95\. The Court accepts the plea of the Appellants/ Defendants that a
fundamental error has been committed by the learned Single Judge in noting in
the opening line of para 175 that ―the Plaintiffs are owners of their
respective trademarks and there is no dispute regarding the ownership‖. It
must be observed at the outset, that in none of the plaints, have the
Plaintiffs asserted or even mentioned anything about trademark registration.
There was no occasion for the Plaintiffs to assert ownership of such
trademarks. In fact, there is no such pleading to that effect at all. How the
learned Single Judge could have come to such a conclusion and, that too, in a
categorical manner, in the absence of any pleadings, is a mystery.

96\. As the learned Single Judge rightly notes, the suits were not suits for
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 45 of 69 infringement of trademarks,
or even for that matter, passing off. Even as this has been acknowledged in
the impugned judgment, the learned Single Judge proceeds to examine whether
there has been an infringement of the trademarks. This is entirely outside the
purview of the pleadings in the suits and such a venture in this regard ought
not to have been undertaken by the learned Single Judge.

97\. In any event, according to the Appellants/Defendants, the Plaintiffs were
not the proprietors of the trademarks ‗Amway' and ‗Oriflame' respectively.
Amway has been registered in the name of Amway Corporation and Alticore Inc.,
and Oriflame in the name of Oriflame Cosmetics AG, neither of which entities
are parties to the suits. The case of the Appellants/Defendants is that once
the goods have been lawfully acquired by a person by sale of the goods in the
market, the further sale of such goods in the market by that person would not
amount to infringement of the proprietor's trademark. The contention is that
Section 30 of the TM Act limits the monopoly rights of the trademark owner and
confers a benefit on traders to trade lawfully and acquire goods. Conscious of
this position, according to the Appellants/Defendants, the Plaintiffs did not
argue that the Appellants were infringing any registered trademark.

98\. As already noticed, the action brought by the Respondents/Plaintiffs in
the shape of the suits in question, was not one of trademark infringement or
passing off.

99\. Under Section 19 of the SOGA, upon a contract for sale for a specific
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 46 of 69 property, the property and
the goods are transferred to the buyer. The ―Code of Ethics‖ framed by Amway
itself states that once the sale takes place, the title in the products is
transferred to the buyer i.e. the ABOs, on its first sale. Once the title
passes to the ABO, no condition could be further imposed upon the buyer.
Clause 7 (6) of the DSGs imposes one such condition on the buyer that the
buyer cannot resell the product online. With such a condition not being an
enforceable law vis-a-vis the third party, even if it were to be considered
binding as such, by means of the contract between Amway and the ABO, Amway can
at best seek to proceed against the ABO for breach of such condition. This is
because there is no privity of contract between Amway, or for that matter
between Oriflame and Modicare, with the online platforms.

Lifting the corporate veil

100\. Arguments at some length were advanced by the Respondents herein
regarding the relationship between the Amazon, on the one hand, and Cloudtail,
on the other. The assertion by Cloudtail is that it is a wholly owned
subsidiary of M/s Prione Business Services Pvt. Ltd. (‗Prione'), which has no
relation with Amazon and that Amazon and Cloudtail are independent legal
entities. Prione is a joint venture between M/s Catamaran Ventures and Amazon
Asia Pacific and Amazon Eurasia. Cloudtail states that it does not have any
shareholding, interest or directors from Amazon or Amazon Asia Pacific or
Amazon Eurasia, controlling and managing its affairs. The board of Cloudtail
is said to comprise of three directors, two of which are nominees of M/s
Catamaran Ventures and one is the MD-CEO i.e. an employee of Cloudtail.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 47 of 69

101\. In any event, these are matters of evidence. There could not have been a
presumption that Cloudtail and Amazon are one and the same entity and that the
obligations of the Cloudtail would bind Amazon and vice versa. There is merit
in the contention of Amazon that by permitting private entities like Amway to
restrict downstream distribution of genuine goods, by enforcing contractual
stipulations against third parties, the judgment of the learned Single Judge
recognizes a monopoly that can be exercised in perpetuity. There is also force
in the contention that this runs contrary to the legal position explained in
Kapil Wadhwa v. Samsung Electronics (supra). At this stage, the Court would
like to discuss at some length the said decision, as it has a direct bearing
on the case at hand.

The decision in Kapil Wadhwa 102.1 The facts in Kapil Wadhwa (supra) are that
Samsung Electronics Company Limited (‗SECL') and Samsung India Electronics
Private Limited (‗SIEPL') were companies incorporated in Korea and India
respectively. SIEPL was the subsidiary of SECL. They were part of the Samsung
group of companies, which had 14 listed companies and 285 worldwide
operations. They were in the business of manufacturing and trading electronic
goods, including colour televisions, home appliances, washing machines, air
conditioners, computers, printers and cartridges, etc. The business was done
under the brand/corporate name, using the trademark ‗Samsung'.

102.2 In India, SECL had licensed the use of its trademark ‗Samsung' to SIEPL
under a Trademark Agreement dated 8th July, 2003, which had been filed with
the Trademark Registry for registration. The grievance of both FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 48 of 69 SECL and SIEPL was that Kapil
Wadhwa and others i.e. the Appellants in that case, were purchasing from the
foreign market printers manufactured and sold by SECL under the trademark
‗Samsung', and after importing them into India and selling the products in the
Indian market under the same trademark, thereby infringing the registered
trademark of the Respondents in India. It was alleged that the Appellants were
operating their website by meta-tagging the same to the website of SECL and
SIEPL.

102.3 The Respondents alleged that injury was being caused to the customers in
India, who were paying less for the printers in question but were misled into
believing that they were purchasing authorized Samsung products in India sold
with the permission of the Respondents, when in fact the printers imported and
sold were materially different from the ones sold in the Indian market.
Appellants highlighted that their import and sale was beneficial to the Indian
public since their aim was to sell the products at the prices less than 30 to
50% of the compatible products sold by SECL and SIEPL.

102.4 The Appellants further contended that the Respondents did not
manufacture the products in India and that they also import the products.
According to the Appellants, their act of importing the products was
authorized and the sale in the Indian market was legal inasmuch as the
Appellants sold the products ―as it is‖.

102.5 The learned Single Judge held in favour of SECL and SIEPL by holding
that the TM Act involved the national exhaustion principle. The action brought
by SECL and SIEPL before the Court was one of infringement FAO(OS) 133/2019 &
connected matters Page 49 of 69 of trademark and not for passing off.

102.6 The Division Bench identified the issue as one of ―parallel imports/grey
market goods‖. It was held that Section 30 operated as an exception to Section

29\. Under Section 30 (2) (b) of the TM Act, if a trademark was registered,
subject to any conditions of limitations, the use of that trademark in
relation to the goods to be sold or traded in any place and in relation to the
goods to be exported to any market, would not constitute an infringement. It
was held that once the goods have been lawfully acquired, if they are put into
market and further sold, there would be no infringement of the trademark
irrespective of the fact that whether such a market is an international market
or a domestic market.

102.7 The Division Bench disagreed with the conclusion reached by the learned
Single Judge, in the context of Section 29 (6) of the TM Act, that if a
trademark is registered in one country, then the goods bearing the said
registered trademark, can be lawfully acquired in that country alone. It,
therefore, further disagreed with the conclusion in para 68 (d) of the
judgment of the learned Single Judge that Section 30 of the TM Act implied
that the goods lawfully acquired must originate from ―the domestic market‖.

102.8 The Division Bench then concluded as under:

> ―42. There is a patent fallacy in paragraph 68(c). There is no law which
> stipulates that goods sold under a trade mark can be lawfully acquired only
> in the country where the trade mark is registered. In fact, the legal
> position is to the contrary. Lawful acquisition of goods would mean the
> lawful acquisition thereof FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 50 of
> 69 as per the laws of that country pertaining to sale and purchase of goods.
> Trade Mark Law is not to regulate the sale and purchase of goods. It is to
> control the use of registered trademarks. Say for example, there is food
> scarcity in a country and the sale of wheat is banned except through a
> canalizing agency. Lawful acquisition of wheat in that country can only be
> through the canalizing agency. The learned Single Judge has himself
> recognized that the law of trademarks recognizes the principle of
> international exhaustion of rights to control further trade of the goods put
> on the market under the trade mark. The task of the learned Single Judge
> thus was to resolve the impasse in the Indian Law, and thus the
> presumption/assumption in paragraph 68(c) could not be the point to resolve
> the textual context in which the learned Single Judge has discussed in
> paragraph 68(d).‖ 102.9 In other words, the Division Bench interpreted the
> word ―market‖ in Section 30 (3) of the TM Act to include the international
> market.

102.10 The Division Bench then went on to interpret Section 30 (4) of the TM
Act, which states that the further dealings in the goods placed in the market
under a trademark, can be opposed where legitimate reasons exist to cause
further dealings, and in particular whether condition of goods has been
changed or impaired. The Division Bench then went on to explain as under:

> ―With respect to physical condition being changed or impaired, even in the
> absence of a statutory provision, the registered proprietor of a trade mark
> would have the right to oppose further dealing in those goods inasmuch as
> they would be the same goods improperly so called, or to put it differently,
> if a physical condition of goods is changed, it would no longer be the same
> goods. But, sub-section 4 of Section 30 is not restricted to only when the
> conditions of the goods has been changed or impaired after they have been
> put on the market. The section embraces all legitimate reasons to oppose
> further dealings in the goods. Thus, changing condition or impairment is
> only a specie of the genus FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 51 of
> 69 legitimate reasons, which genus embraces other species as well. What are
> these species?

> (i) Difference in services and warranties as held in the decisions reported
> as 423 F.3d 1037(2005) SKF USA v International Trade Commission & Ors.; 35
> USPQ2d 1053 (1995) Fender Musical Instruments Corp. v. Unlimited Music
> Center Inc.; 589 F. Supp. 1163 (1984) Osawa & Co. v. B&H Photo.

> (ii) Difference in advertising and promotional efforts as held in the
> decisions reported as 70 F.Supp 2d 1057 Pepsi Co Inc v Reyes;589 F. Supp.
> 1163 (1984) Osawa & Co. v. B&H Photo.

> (iii) Differences in packaging as held in the decision reported as 753 F.
> Supp. 1240 (1991) Ferrerro USA v. Ozak Trading.

> (iv) Differences in quality control, pricing and presentation as held in the
> decision reported as 982 F.2d 633 (1992) Societe Des Produits Nestle v. Casa
> Helvetia. (v) Differences in language of the literature provided with the
> product as held in the decisions reported as 423 F.3d 1037(2005) SKF USA v
> International Trade Commission &Ors.; 70F.Supp 2d 1057 PepsiCo Inc v
> Reyes;816 F.2d 68,76(2nd Cir. 1987) Original Appalachian Artworks Inc. v.
> Granada Electronics Inc.

> 69\. Now, as we see it, this can only happen in case where goods have to be
> imported from a country of manufacture or a country where they are put on
> the market thereof, and then imported into India. Only then would there be a
> difference in the language of the literature provided with the product;
> difference in services and warranties in the country from where the goods
> are imported by the seller and the country of import i.e. the manufacturer's
> warranties not being available in the country of import; difference in
> quality control, pricing and presentation as also differences in advertising
> and promotional efforts.

> 70\. This is also an indication of India adopting the Principle of
> International Exhaustion of Rights in the field of the Trade Mark FAO(OS)
> 133/2019 & connected matters Page 52 of 69 Law.

71\. We accordingly conclude that 'the market' contemplated by Section 30(3)
of the Trade Marks Act 1999 is the international market i.e. that the
legislation in India adopts the Principle of International Exhaustion of
Rights.‖ 102.11 Finally, the Division Bench examined whether SECL and SIEPL
were entitled to oppose further dealings by the importer of the printers to
India under Section 30 (4) of the TM Act. It was held as under:

―71...Now, the Principle of International Exhaustion of Rights itself takes
away the right of the respondents to control the further sale and further
distribution of the goods. With respect to after sales services, since the
respondents do not warranty anything regarding their goods sold abroad, but
imported into India and further sold, they not being responsible for the
warranty of those goods, nothing turns thereon, as regards said plea. There
may be some merit that the ordinary consumer, who is provided with warranties
and after sales by the appellants, on not receiving satisfactory after sales
service, may form a bad impression of the product of the respondents and thus
to said extent one may recognize a possible damage to the reputation of the
respondents pertaining to Samsung/SAMSUNG printers and Samsung/SAMSUNG
products sold in India after importation. But, this can be taken care of by
passing suitable directions requiring the appellants to prominently display in
their shop that the Samsung/SAMSUNG printers sold by them are imported by the
appellants and that after sales services and warranties are not guaranteed nor
are they provided under the authority and control of the respondents and that
the appellants do so at their own end and with their own efforts. This would
obviate any consumer dissatisfaction adversely affecting the reputation of the
respondents, and thus if this is done, the respondents can claim no legitimate
reasons to oppose further dealing in Samsung/SAMSUNG products in India.

74\. As regards the appellants meta-tagging their websites with those of the
respondents, the learned Single Judge has correctly injuncted the FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 53 of 69 appellants from so doing, which
injunction we affirm. The argument by the appellants that how else would the
appellants know about the working of the particular product hardly impresses
us for the reason the appellants can design their website in a manner where
they are able, on their own strength, without any meta-tagging, to display the
relevant information.‖ 102.12 The above passages in Kapil Wadhwa v Samsung
Electronics (supra) are a complete answer to many of the contentions raised by
Amway, Modicare and Oriflame in the present case. In the considered view of
this Court, the learned Single Judge was in error in distinguishing the
decision in Kapil Wadhwa v Samsung Electronics (supra) by holding that the
principle of exhaustion cannot be invoked by the Appellants/Defendants.

Reports of the LC

103\. At this stage, it is necessary to notice that the learned Single Judge
has based the conclusions about the tampering of goods of the Plaintiffs
essentially on the four reports of the LCs. The first LC report dated 6th
October, 2018 has been submitted by Mr. Aditya Vaibhav Singh, who visited the
premises of Cloudtail. All that the report indicates is that the LC was
informed that the Amway goods supplied to Cloudtail were bought from one Mr.
Vinit, who operated from Bhaghirath Place. The representative on the site
informed the LC that he did not have any bills for the said transaction and
the purchases had been made in cash. He further stated that ―he could not
satisfy the complete purchase order (with respect to Amway) and only supplied
the goods which he could purchase at that point of time.‖ Thus, this report is
entirely unhelpful to support the conclusions drawn by the learned Single
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 54 of 69 Judge about large-scale
tampering of goods.

104\. The second report is dated 12th October, 2018 and has been submitted by
Mr. Arun Wighmal. He visited the premises of Pioneering Products, the
Defendant No. 1 in CS (OS) 480/2018, and found that it was under the control
of and being operated by Amazon. He found various products bearing the mark
‗Amway' getting packed to be dispatched to their respective buyers. The LC
states that despite the denial and resistance of Amazon's representatives, he
inspected the premises, upon which he found a ―good quantity‖ of products
labelled ‗Amway' on the second floor. He found copies of stock transfer notes
dated 8th and 27th September, 2018, showing that more than 2400 Amway products
were transferred from the premises of Pioneering Products to the premises
under inspection, which actually belonged to Amazon but was referred to as
―the additional place of business‖ of Pioneering Products.

105\. The crucial portion of the report is where the LC states that he opened
two different sealed packages of the said Amway products and found that one of
those did not contain the unique code. The package which did not contain the
unique code was resealed. The learned Single Judge has, in the impugned
judgment, set out in the body of the judgment the photographs taken by the LC
with the caption ―images showing removal of seals and repackaging at Amazon
warehouse.‖

106\. What the LC has not indicated is whether prior to the LC opening the
sealed packages, he found the packages to have been otherwise tampered with.
If it was the LC who opened the seal of the packages, then clearly till
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 55 of 69 such time they remained
sealed. It could not therefore be said that it was Amazon or Amazon's
representatives which opened those sealed packages. Only two products are
referred to by the LC, one of which did not have the bar code. Who removed
these bar codes is still in question. If the seller who sold the product to
Amazon had itself removed it, clearly then Amazon could not be blamed for
tampering with the bar code.

107\. From this one example, it is difficult to understand how the learned
Single Judge could have concluded that Amazon was tampering with the products
of Amway. This was too sweeping a conclusion to arrive at. It could not form
the basis for the denial of the principle of exhaustion by invoking Section 30
(4) of the TM Act. As to whether the goods were in fact tampered with, since
the report of the LC does not appear to indicate that he saw such tampering
take place in his presence by Amazon, the question could only be settled by
examining evidence.

108\. In fact, in the written submissions on behalf of Amway, it is conceded
that these constitute matters awaiting trial. If that is the position, then it
was not open to the learned Single Judge to conclude, and that too at the
interlocutory stage, that there was tampering of the products by Amazon. The
second LC's report, therefore, does not come to the Plaintiffs' aid in order
to assert that Amway products were being tampered with on Amazon's premises.
Amazon states that it receives goods in a packed condition and then repacks
them in Amazon's own packing, for further security and safety, to make the
packages tamper proof. This again is a matter for evidence.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 56 of 69

109\. Turning now to the third LC's report dated 15th October, 2018, Ms. Richa
Bhargava visited the premises of Black Olive (Defendant No. 2 in CS (OS)
480/2018). The LC concluded that the premises were under the control of Amazon
on the basis that boards and hoardings of Amazon were found there. The LC
found various products bearing the mark ‗Amway' getting packed to be
dispatched to their respective buyers. This report, therefore, did not
indicate any tampering of Amway products.

110\. The LC found that ―many of the products did not have the unique bar
code.‖ However, the LC's report is not helpful in determining whether it was
Amazon which had removed the unique code. It is possible that there are
products of Amway that do not have the unique code but some other marker.
These, again, are matters for evidence. Therefore, this report is also
unhelpful in determining if any tampering was done by Amazon.

111\. The fourth report dated 16th October, 2018 is of Mr. B. Prashant Kumar.
He also visited the premises of Cloudtail. He noticed that it was used as a
common office for Cloudtail and its sister concern, Prione. The LC has placed
on record pictures taken at the premises where Prione refers to itself as ―a
Catamaran and Amazon venture.‖ The premises were ―almost empty, with the desks
completely clean.‖ There were no laptops, files, desktops or any other office
related products to inspect. There was no particular warehouse that could be
associated with Cloudtail in and around the premises. How this report could
then form the basis for inferring that there had been tampering of goods by
Cloudtail or Amazon is beyond imagination.

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 57 of 69

112\. The broad conclusions reached by the learned Single Judge tend to
obfuscate the factual distinctions between the cases involving the different
online platforms. For instance, both in the first and the fourth reports of
the LCs, no Amway products were found on Cloudtail's premises. Similarly, the
learned Single Judge has failed to appreciate Snapdeal's submissions that
unlike Amazon, it does not even engage in large-scale ‗fulfilment' of orders,
and consequently has very few storage and transportation facilities and barely
comes into contact with the products sold on its platform. These submissions
are at least prima facie supported by the LC's Report dated 27th September,
2019 in FAO (OS) 157/2019, to which the learned Single Judge has made no
reference at all. No LC was appointed in Oriflame's suit. The facts revealed
in the LCs reports were insufficient to make any specific conclusions
regarding the impairment of the products vis-à-vis each of the present
Appellants.

113\. The learned Single Judge also appears to have accepted the plea of the
Plaintiffs that the Defendants engage in the inflation of the maximum retail
price (‗MRP') of their products to offer ‗fake discounts' to consumers.
Amazon's case is that it has a strict policy of removing listings without
further questions if a complaint is received claiming that the MRP of a
particular product has been ‗inflated'. In any event, according to Amazon, the
MRP displayed on the listings are ―entirely user generated‖ and it ―does not
determine or influence the MRP whatsoever.‖

114\. The learned Single Judge also did not inquire about the discounts passed
on by Amway to its distributors, which are then passed on to the consumers,
resulting in the sale of Amway products at high discounts in any case. In a
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 58 of 69 similar vein, the
conclusion that the consumers have to embark on a ―Sherlockian venture‖ to
trace the sellers of these products or that the sellers on Amazon's
marketplace are not identifiable has not taken into account the sellers'
details visible along with product listings on Amazon's marketplace, which
were disclosed in Amazon's additional affidavits dated 24th April, 2019\.

115\. Not only Amazon, but also Cloudtail and Snapdeal submit that details of
the products, such as the brand and the seller are clearly provided on their
online marketplaces. Where there are multiple sellers, the details of the
offers of all such sellers are said to be available. Such information, it is
submitted, is generated directly by the said sellers and not modified by the
Defendants in any manner. Only the buyer's information is withheld from the
seller until after the sale has concluded, a policy which is in the interest
of the buyers insofar as it prevents the misuse of the buyers' information by
the sellers. These aspects do not appear to have been considered by the
learned Single Judge. These too are matters in respect of which clearer
answers would emerge hopefully at the conclusion of the trial.

116\. The Court is, therefore, unable to concur with the view expressed by the
learned Single Judge that the Defendants could not invoke the principle of
exhaustion in terms of Section 30 (3) read with Section 30 (4) of the TM Act,
or that the sale of the Plaintiffs' products on e-commerce platforms violates
their trademark rights, constitutes misrepresentation and passing off, and
results in the dilution and tarnishing of the goodwill and reputation of the
Plaintiffs' brand. These findings are outside the purview and scope of FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 59 of 69 pleadings in the suits and
unsustainable in law.

Are the Appellants intermediaries?

117\. Turning now to the third issue as to whether Amazon, Cloudtail and
Snapdeal were in fact intermediaries within the meaning of Section 79 read
with 2 (1) (w) of the IT Act, the learned Single Judge has extensively
examined the incidental services provided by these platforms in the form of
packaging and entering into fresh warranties. This aspect has already been
discussed at length in the decision in Kapil Wadhwa v. Samsung Electronics Co.
Ltd. (supra) wherein it was held that the mere fact that there could be a
change in the condition of the warranty of a certain product would not attract
Section 30 (4) of the TM Act, and equally would not deprive the intermediaries
from the option of invoking Section 79 of the IT Act in their defence.

118\. The learned Single Judge appears to have misinterpreted Section 79 of
the IT Act in concluding that is restricted to ‗passive' intermediaries.
Section 79 of the IT Act reads as under:

> ―79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases:

> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
> force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), an
> intermediary shall not be liable for any third-party information, data, or
> communication link made available or hosted by him.

> (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if--

FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 60 of 69

> (a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a
> communication system over which information made available by third parties
> is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; or

> (b) the intermediary does not--

> (i) initiate the transmission,

> (ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and

> (iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;

> (c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties
> under this Act and also observes such other guidelines as the Central
> Government may prescribe in this behalf.

> (3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if--

> (a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether
> by threats or promise or otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act;

> (b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate
> Government or its agency that any information, data or communication link
> residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled by the
> intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary
> fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that
> resource without vitiating the evidence in any manner.

> Explanation-For the purposes of this section, the expression ―third party
> information‖ means any information dealt with by an intermediary in his
> capacity as an intermediary.‖

119\. In terms of Section 79 of the IT Act, there does not appear to be any
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 61 of 69 distinction between passive
and active intermediaries so far as the availability of the safe harbour
provisions are concerned. In terms of Section 79, an intermediary shall not be
liable for any third-party information, data or communication link made
available or posted by it, as long as it complies with Sections 79 (2) or (3)
of the IT Act.

120\. The exemption under Section 79 (1) of the IT Act from liability applies
when the intermediaries fulfil the criteria laid down in either Section 79 (2)

(a) or Section 79 (2) (b), and Section 79 (2) (c) of the IT Act. Where the
intermediary merely provides access, it has to comply with Section 79 (2) (a),
whereas in instances where it provides services in addition to access, it has
to comply with Section 79 (2) (b) of the IT Act.

121\. In Amazon's case, as indeed in Cloudtail's and Snapdeal's, since they
provide services in addition to access, they have to show compliance with
Section 79 (2) (b) of the IT Act. In other words, they have to show that they

(i) do not initiate the transmission (ii) do not select the receiver of the
transmission and (iii) do not select or modify the information contained in
the transmission. The case of these Defendants is as follows. Where there is a
potential customer who is accessing the site, so long as it is he who clicks
the button, it is the customer who is initiating the transmission. Amazon,
Snapdeal or Cloudtail do not ‗select' the receiver of the transmission, which
is the buyer. They do not modify the information contained in the
transmission, such as the choice of the product, the number of units, and so
forth. For example, if a potential buyer goes to Amazon's website and selects
a book sold by a seller whose name is indicated on the site, as long as this
entire FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 62 of 69 transaction is not
controlled by Amazon and the choices, of which the transaction consists, are
made solely by the customer, such as, say, the decision to purchase three
copies of the book, and these choices are not altered by Amazon, the
requirements of Section 79 (2) (b) of the IT Act would stand fulfilled.

122\. Given the disputed questions of fact that emerge from the pleadings in
the suit, it is obvious that the issue of whether an entity is an intermediary
or not can be decided only after a trial. In this context, it should be noted
that the reasoning of the learned Single Judge in Christian Louboutin SAS v.
Nakul Bajaj (supra) was disapproved of by a Division Bench of this Court in
its judgment dated 4th April, 2019 in RFA (OS) (COMM) 1/2019 (M/s. Clues
Network Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. L'Oréal), wherein the Court set aside an order of
the learned Single Judge, which relied, inter alia, on Christian Louboutin SAS
v. Nakul Bajaj (supra). Indeed, the learned Single Judge appears to have erred
in distinguishing the decision in Myspace Inc. v. Super Cassettes Industries
Ltd. (supra), where the Division Bench held that Section 79 of the IT Act is
not an ―enforceable provision‖, but merely provides ―affirmative defence‖ to
entities which fulfil the criteria set forth therein. It was observed by the
DB in the said case as under:

> ―51... The true intent of Section 79 is to ensure that in terms of globally
> accepted standards of intermediary liabilities and to further digital trade
> and economy, an intermediary is granted certain protections. Section 79 is
> neither an enforcement provision nor does it list out any penal consequences
> for non- compliance. It sets up a scheme where intermediaries have to follow
> certain minimum standards to avoid liability; it provides for an affirmative
> defence and not a blanket immunity from FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters
> Page 63 of 69 liability.‖

123\. Section 79 of the IT Act is a safe harbour for online market places,
limiting their liability for third party information posted on their systems.
It is to ensure that the liability for non-compliance and/or violation of law
by a third party, i.e. the seller, is not fastened on the online market place.
In holding that Amazon is in fact not an intermediary, the learned Single
Judge has obviated the need for any evidence to be led in the matter.

124\. During the course of arguments before this Court, the
Respondents/Plaintiffs were not at all clear as to whether, according to them,
Amazon was in fact an intermediary or not. In any event, the alternative
arguments, claiming that Amazon is not an intermediary, appear to be riddled
with inconsistencies. If, in fact, Amazon is not an intermediary, the question
of Amazon having to comply with Section 79 (2) of the IT Act would not arise
at all. Clearly, the Respondents seem to be unsure as to what their stand
ought to be. As a result, the burden of proof has shifted unfairly onto the
Defendants to show that they have complied with the requirements of Section 79
of the IT Act, when in fact the Plaintiffs have to first show that there had
been a violation of any of their rights due to the Defendants' activities
before the ―affirmative defence‖ of Section 79 could be sought to be invoked.
Therefore, Section 79 of the IT Act has been, contrary to the judgment in
Myspace Inc. v. Super Cassettes Industries Ltd. (supra), sought to be enforced
by the Plaintiffs positively, rather than be deployed as ―affirmative
defence.‖ FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 64 of 69

125\. There is prima facie merit in the contention of the Appellants that the
value-added services provided by them as online market places, as listed out
by the learned Single Judge, do not dilute the safe harbour granted to them
under Section 79 of the IT Act. Section 2 (1) (w) of the IT Act does envisage
that such intermediaries could provide value-added services to third party
sellers. This interpretation is sought to be buttressed by Press Note No. 2
issued by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. In particular, reference is
made to para 5.2.15.2.4 (vi), which reads as under:

> ―In marketplace model goods/services made available for sale electronically
> on website should clearly provide name, address and other contact details of
> the seller, post sales, delivery of goods to the customers and customer
> satisfaction will be responsibility of the seller.‖

126\. There was no occasion for the learned Single Judge to have, at the stage
of considering applications for interim injunction, returned a conclusive
finding that Amazon is ―a massive facilitator‖ and plays an ―active role in
the sales process.‖ These are too sweeping and definitive a set of findings
which have to be properly rendered at the conclusion of the trial. Here again
there is prima facie merit in Amazon's contention that merely because it packs
and ships the product does not mean that the sale is consummated by Amazon.
Amazon contends that such an interpretation runs afoul of both Section 79 of
the IT Act and the policy laid down by the Press Note No. 2, a portion of
which have been extracted hereinabove. Amazon explains that when the sale of
product is ―fulfilled by Amazon‖, all it means is that Amazon guarantees the
quality of the product by rendering logistical support services, which include
storage, packaging and delivery. These are again matters that would FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 65 of 69 have to be tested at the trial.

127\. Under Section 79 (2) (c) of the IT Act, the obligation of the
intermediary is that, in terms of the Intermediary Guidelines, it publishes
its policies for the information and convenience of its users. The enforcement
of such a policy is another matter. Clause 17 of Amazon's policy prohibits
sale, on its platform, of ―unauthorised‖ products. This Clause 17 was put
forth with the object of enabling Amazon to refuse listing of a product where,
for instance, it originates from a country that does not follow international
exhaustion. Amazon seeks to point out that this does not apply to India where
the principle of international exhaustion is in fact followed. It is contended
that Clause 17 cannot be interpreted to empower Amway to seek restrictions on
the sale of its products on Amazon's online platform.

128\. The Supreme Court in Shreya Singhal (supra) held, inter alia, that the
obligation of an intermediary to remove content under Section 79 (3) (b) of
the IT Act arises only if there is a Court order or a notification from a
government agency on the grounds mentioned under Article 19 (2) of the
Constitution. Amazon points out that it did not receive any such Court order
from Amway in support of its allegations. The letter of the FSSAI dated 9 th
April, 2018 was not a notification by an appropriate government agency and did
not conform to the grounds enumerated in Article 19 (2) of the Constitution.

129\. Therefore, on the third issue also, this Court is unable to concur with
the learned Single Judge that Amazon, Snapdeal and Cloudtail would have to
FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 66 of 69 meet the diligence
requirement, failing which the benefit of the safe harbour provision i.e.
Section 79 of the IT Act would not be available to them.

Tortious interference

130\. The Court turns now to the last issue, viz., whether the platforms are
guilty of tortious interference with a contractual relationship. This
incidentally is the central plank of Modicare's case.

131\. In the first place, the tort of inducement to breach of contract
necessitates that there be a contract in the first place between the online
platforms and the DSEs. The mere fact that the online platforms may have
knowledge of the Code of Ethics of the DSEs, and the contractual stipulation
imposed by such DSEs on their distributors, is insufficient to lay a claim of
tortious interference. It was incumbent on the part of the Plaintiffs to
demonstrate active efforts on the part of or contracts entered into by the
Appellants/Defendants to make a viable case for tort of inducement to breach
of contract.

132\. The Appellants state that the placing of the products on the Appellant's
online platforms is entirely voluntary. It is not induced by these platforms.
The services of warehousing, transportation, packing, and so on are provided
by these online platforms, not just to the products of the DSEs, but to all
products offered for sale on their platforms. They accordingly contend that
the mere provision of platforms for sale would not amount to inducement to
breach of contract. They contend that it is for the DSEs to proceed against
their respective ABOs/sellers to deal with the breach of contractual FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 67 of 69 obligations on their part. These
are again contentions that can be decided upon finally only at trial. The
learned Single Judge could not, at the interlocutory stage, have brushed these
contentions aside.

133\. The judgments relied upon in this regard by the learned Single Judge,
the Appellants submit, are distinguishable on facts from the present case. The
sale of products of the DSEs on the Appellants' online platforms was neither
in violation of extant laws or opposed to public policy, as in Aasia
Industrial Technologies Limited vs Ambience Space Sellers Limited (supra), nor
were there, in the present instance, specific acts intended to induce breach,
such as the persuasive telexes in Balailal Mukherjee and Company Private
Limited vs. Sea Traders Private Limited (supra). In any event, on the facts of
the present case, whether in fact any of the online platforms induced a breach
of contract between the DSE and its ABOs/sellers is at best a matter of
evidence, and not of inference.

No case for interim injunction

134\. Of the three elements to be considered for the grant of interim
injunction, the Plaintiffs, in the considered view of this Court, failed to
establish that they have a prima facie case particularly since the DSGs could
not be considered to be binding law. Interestingly, the ABOs/direct sellers
alleged to have committed the breach of the DSGs were not impleaded as
Defendants.

135\. Even on the test of balance of convenience, the learned Single Judge has
only returned such a conclusion, without actually examining whether the grant
of injunction would have an adverse impact on online marketing. What FAO(OS)
133/2019 & connected matters Page 68 of 69 was not considered is whether the
requirement of online marketing entities to seek prior consent of the DSEs
would not deprive the consumer of exercising the choice to buy such products
on online platforms, while ensuring free flow of trade.

136\. As regards irreparable loss and injury, there was no empirical data
placed before the learned Single Judge by the Plaintiffs in support of their
contention that they had suffered huge losses. This again was a matter of
evidence and not inference.

137\. Consequently, the Court is unable to concur with the learned Single
Judge that the three elements for the purposes of grant of interim injunction
have been fulfilled in the present case.

Conclusion

138\. For all of the aforementioned reasons, the impugned judgment of the
learned Single Judge is hereby set aside. The applications seeking interim
injunction in the suits stand dismissed. The appeals are allowed and
applications disposed of in the above terms with costs of Rs. 50,000/- in each
of the appeals, which will be paid by the respective Plaintiffs/Respondents to
the corresponding Appellants within four weeks from today.

S. MURALIDHAR, J.

TALWANT SINGH, J.

JANUARY 31, 2020mw/rd FAO(OS) 133/2019 & connected matters Page 69 of 69

