

Delhi High Court

Shri Pankaj Goel vs M/S. Dabur India Ltd. on 4 July, 2008

Author: Manmohan

    
    
                  HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
                                FAO (OS) 82 OF 2008
    
                                                 Reserved on :- 8th May, 2008
    
                                               Date of Decision: July 4th, 2008
    
    # Shri Pankaj Goel                                 ..... Appellant
    !                           Through
                                     Mr. Arun Jaitley, Mr. Rajiv Nayyar,
                                     Senior Advocates with Ms. Pratibha M.
                                     Singh, Mr. Sanjeev Singh and Mr. Y.K.
                                     Gupta, Advocates
    
                                        Versus
    
    $ M/s. Dabur India Ltd.                     ..... Respondent
                           Through
                                Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Mr. Sudhir Chandra
                                Aggarwal, Senior Advocates with
                                Mr. Hemant Singh and Ms. Mamta Rani
                                Jha, Advocates
    
    CORAM:
    
    * HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
    * HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
    
         1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
            allowed to see the judgment?                            Yes.
         2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?                  Yes.
         3. Whether the judgment should be reported                 Yes.
            in the digest?
    
                           JUDGMENT
    

MANMOHAN, J :

1\. The present appeal has been filed against the ex-parte injunction order
dated 20th December, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge. The trial court
after holding that the Plaintiff's/ FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 1 of 17
Respondent's Mark HAJMOLA was a well known mark under Section 2(zg) of the
Trade Mark Act, 1999 held that the Defendant's mark RASMOLA for the same
product was deceptively similar and likely to cause confusion in the minds of
the customers of these products, especially children. Consequently, by virtue
of the impugned order, the learned Single Judge restrained the
Appellant/Defendant from using the mark RASMOLA and in particular the suffix
MOLA in respect of the digestive tablets manufactured and sold by it.

2\. At the outset, we suggested to both the parties that we would request the
learned Single Judge to expeditiously dispose of the injunction application,
as any decision by us would deprive either of the party to a right of appeal.
However, Mr. Arun Jaitley, learned Senior Counsel for Appellant submitted that
as the learned Single Judge had not disposed of either the injunction
application or the Appellant's application for vacation of injunction within
thirty days, the present appeal was maintainable. In any event, both the
parties requested this Court to dispose of the present appeal on merits.
Consequently, with the consent of both the parties the present appeal is being
taken up for disposal.

3\. Mr. Arun Jaitley, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant has contended
that the Appellant has been using the mark RASMOLA for FAO (OS) No. 82/2008
Page 2 of 17 its product namely digestive tablets since 1989. He further
contended that the Appellant's mark had been registered vide Certificate dated
3rd July, 1996. Consequently, Mr. Arun Jaitley submits that no suit for
infringement is maintainable against the Appellant.

4\. Mr. Arun Jaitley further contended that the suffix MOLA is not an invented
word of the Respondent/Plaintiff and the latter had no monopoly in the said
word. In fact, according to the Appellant, the word MOLA is common to the
trade as more than 25 trademarks are registered with the suffix MOLA. Mr. Arun
Jaitley stated that variants of MOLA for digestive tablets are commonly
available in the market.

5\. According to the Appellant, the Respondent/Plaintiff had obtained the
impugned ex-parte injunction order by concealing and suppressing vital facts
as well as by making misrepresentations before the learned Single Judge. It
was contended that the Respondent/Plaintiff had concealed the fact of filing
of three earlier suits by it, against the user of marks SIDHMOLA, SATMOLA AND
CHATMOLA being Suit No. 1644/1998, Suit No. 62/2006 and Suit No. 765/1993. In
all the aforesaid three suits, the Respondent/Plaintiff had got no relief and
it subsequently FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 3 of 17 compromised the suits by
permitting those three parties to use the marks SIDHMOLA, SATMOLA AND
CHATMOLA.

6\. It was further contended that the Respondent/Plaintiff's suit is hit by
law of acquiescence and delay as the Respondent/Plaintiff had knowledge of
adoption of user of the mark RASMOLA for a long time. In this connection
Appellant relied upon back to back advertisement of Appellant and Respondent's
products on national TV channels like Star Gold, Set Max and Doordarshan in
the years 2005 and 2006. It was further alleged that the Respondent/Plaintiff
had been aware of the user of the trade mark RASMOLA for a long time but
despite their knowledge, they knowingly made misrepresentation in the plaint
about the Appellant's adoption and user of the mark RASMOLA as of December,
2007. Learned Senior Counsel for Appellant referred to the cause of action
paragraph in the plaint as well as the notice of opposition dated 25th July,
2007 to the Appellants trademark application which in turn explicitly stated
that the Appellant had been using the mark since April 1993. In this
connection the Appellant relied upon a judgment of Division Bench of this
Court in B.L. & CO. & ORS. VS. PFIZER PRODUCTS INCL. reported in 93 (2001) DLT
page 346.

FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 4 of 17

7\. On the other hand, Dr. A.M. Singhvi and Mr. Sudhir Chandra Aggarwal,
learned senior Counsel for Respondent/Plaintiff contended that the
Respondent/Plaintiff's registered trade mark HAJMOLA is a coined and invented
word. While part of the word HAJ is inspired by hajma which means digestion,
the other part namely MOLA means nothing. Consequently, it was contended that
the word HAJMOLA is very distinctive and the Respondent/Plaintiffs were
entitled to highest protection in the said mark.

8\. The Respondent/Plaintiff further submitted that admittedly it was the
prior user of the registered trade mark HAJMOLA and its usage dates back to
1972. It was contended that in 1989 when the Appellant is alleged to have
first adopted the mark RASMOLA, the Respondent/Plaintiff already had a
turnover of Rs. 8.50 crores in HAJMOLA products and its advertisement budget
was Rs. 50.9 lakhs. According to the Respondent/Plaintiff its annual sales
turnover of HAJMOLA in 2007 was about Rs. 74 crores. It was, therefore
submitted that the Respondent/Plaintiff's mark was already a well known mark.

9\. It was further submitted that the Appellant's adoption of a similar mark
was dishonest and no amount of user could cure it. According to
Respondent/Plaintiff an illegitimate adoption cannot be FAO (OS) No. 82/2008
Page 5 of 17 rectified or cured by a registration as it is a prior use which
confers proprietary rights and dishonest adoption confers no right.

10\. According to Respondent/Plaintiff, Appellant's registration of its
trademark RASMOLA was of no defence as the registration was for the whole of
label/device mark and not the word RASMOLA. Learned Counsel for the
Respondent/Plaintiff submitted that in view of Section 17 of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999 no exclusivity or statutory right can be claimed by the Appellant in
the word/mark on account of device mark registration. Learned Senior Counsel
further submitted that in view of Section 27 (2) of the Trade Mark Act, 1999
registration does not, in any event, affect a passing off action.

11\. Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent/Plaintiff further contended
that except the Appellant claiming in the registration certificate that it was
using the mark since 1989 there was no document on record to show any sale of
RASMOLA product in the year 1989. According to them the only evidence of use
of the mark RASMOLA by the Appellant is 2004 as invoices prior to 2004,
pertain to predecessor-in-business of the Appellant who is claimed to have
assigned the registered trademark; but there was no deed of assignment on
record stating that goodwill had also been assigned to the Appellant.
According to the Respondent/Plaintiff in the absence FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page
6 of 17 of an assignment deed, the Appellant cannot claim benefit of the
alleged stray use of the mark RASMOLA by Appellant's predecessor- in-interest.
The Respondent/Plaintiff further stated that the sales figures of RASMOLA, as
claimed in the appeal, were actually the sum total of sales of 11 products of
the Appellant as reflected in the balance sheet at pages 216 to 230 of the
Paper Book.

12\. As far as back to back advertisement of Appellant and
Respondent/Plaintiff products are concerned, the Respondent/ Plaintiff stated
that there are 419 TV channels on which 34,27,000 TV commercials are telecast
each month. It was pointed out that Respondent/Plaintiff itself had 450
products out of which 72 products are exclusively advertised on 129 TV
channels. According to Respondent/Plaintiff there are 20,000 TV ads in a month
of Respondent/Plaintiff itself on 129 TV channels and therefore, it was not
possible for any company, including the Respondent/Plaintiff, to monitor TV
commercials on all the TV channels. Consequently, it was contended that no
knowledge can be attributed to the Respondent/Plaintiff of any TV commercial
of the Appellant. In this connection the Respondent/Plaintiff relied upon a
judgment/order of this Court in AUTOMATIC ELECTRIC LIMITED VS. R.K. DHAWAN
reported in 1999 PTC (19) 81.

FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 7 of 17

13\. As far as the mark SATMOLA having been allowed by the
Respondent/Plaintiff is concerned, it was stated that the same was by way of a
settlement in Suit No. 62/2006 filed before this Court. The reason given for
settlement was acquiescence, as though the Respondent/Plaintiff had issued a
legal notice to SSG Pharma in 1984 but inadvertently it never followed it up
till 2006 when the said suit was filed. In any event it was submitted that
Section 28 (3) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 permits more than one proprietor
of deceptively similar trademarks. It was also pointed out that the
Respondent/Plaintiff has filed 14 oppositions and issued 14 cease and desist
notices to various users of the suffix MOLA and in fact the Respondent had
even received four undertakings. It was further submitted that the Appellant
had failed to establish substantial commercial use of the suffix MOLA in the
trade, failing which their plea of common to trade must fail. In any event, it
was contended that infringement of Respondent/Plaintiff's mark as pointed out
by the Appellant were insignificant and the Respondent/Plaintiff had not
abandoned its mark but were taking steps to protect the same. It was also
submitted that use of a similar mark by others, in any event, could not be any
defence to an illegal act of passing off.

14\. According to the Respondent/Plaintiff there was no cogent evidence to
establish that the Respondent/Plaintiff knew about the FAO (OS) No. 82/2008
Page 8 of 17 infringing activities of the Appellant and took positive steps to
encourage it. Consequently, it was submitted that plea of acquiescence or
delay must fail. Even otherwise it was submitted that delay or laches would be
no defence to grant of an interim injunction against the unlawful use of
Respondent/Plaintiff's registered trademark HAJMOLA.

15\. It was further submitted by the Respondent/Plaintiff that it was entitled
to the interim injunction as the use of mark RASMOLA by the Appellant is
likely to cause confusion or deception with the Respondent/Plaintiff's mark
HAJMOLA. Such use, according to it, constitutes infringement as well as
passing off. In this connection learned Senior Counsel for Appellant relied
upon a judgment of Supreme Court in AMRITDHARA PHARMACY VS. SATYA DEO GUPTA
reported in AIR 1963 SC 449.

16\. It was further contended that the balance of convenience was entirely in
the Respondent/Plaintiff's favour and further no injury would be caused to the
Appellant if the impugned interim injunction was continued as the Appellant
had 11 digestive tablets products selling under different marks like RASGOLI,
RASMOLI and RASWALI and the Appellant was free to sell its products under
those trademarks. It was further contended that the Appellant had already FAO
(OS) No. 82/2008 Page 9 of 17 been injuncted from manufacturing and selling
products under the mark RASMOLA in the impugned packaging by District Judge,
Muzaffarpur vide order dated 19th October, 2005 in Suit No. 01/2005 filed by
SSG Pharma, user of the mark SATMOLA. It was further contended by the
Respondent/Plaintiff that since the Appellant was guilty of concealment and
misrepresentation, it was not entitled to seek any equitable relief from this
Court. In this connection Respondent/ Plaintiff relied upon a judgment of
Supreme Court in GUJARAT BOTTLING VS. COCA COLA CO. reported in AIR 1995 SC
2372.

17\. In our view, an appeal against an ex-parte injunction lies only in such
cases where the Single Judge does not dispose of the application within thirty
days, without assigning any reason. However, in the present case, the
Appellant itself was not present when its application for vacation of
injunction was taken up for hearing. In any event, the learned Single Judge
could not dispose of the injunction application due to heavy workload and
paucity of time. Even the Supreme Court in A. Venkatasubiah Naidu vs.
Chellappan reported in AIR 2000 SC 3032 has held that an appeal lies against
ex-parte injunction only in such cases where the learned Single Judge does not
give any reason for not disposing the appeal within thirty days. Consequently,
as the learned Single Judge had FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 10 of 17 given
reason for not disposing of the injunction application as well as application
under Order 39 Rule 4, within thirty days, the said injunction is not liable
to be interfered on the short ground, as claimed by the Appellant, that the
said applications had not been disposed of within thirty days.

18\. According to us registration of RASMOLA by the Defendant/Appellant offers
no complete defence to it. Even Kerly in his treatise the 'Trade Marks and
Trade Names', has stated that passing off action can succeed on the same
evidence where trademark action has failed. According to Kerly, the Trade Mark
Act affords no bar to a passing off action. In fact, this concept has been
statutory incorporated in India by virtue of Section 27 (2) of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999. Section 27 (2) clearly stipulates "nothing in this Act shall be
deemed to affect rights of action against any person for passing off goods or
services as the goods of another person or as services provided by another
person or the remedies in respect thereof." A Division Bench of this Court in
N.R. DONGRE VS. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION reported in AIR 1985 Delhi 300 had on
the ground of passing off, even injuncted a registered proprietor of a
trademark from using the same mark. The said judgment was upheld by the
Supreme Court in N.R. DONGRE VS. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION reported in 1996 5 SCC
744.

FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 11 of 17

19\. The Supreme Court in the case of AMRITDHARA PHARMACY referred to
hereinabove, held the mark AMRITDHARA to be deceptively similar to the mark
LAXMANDHARA. The Apex Court in the said Judgment further stipulated that the
issue was to be examined by applying the test of an unwary purchaser having
average intelligence and imperfect recollection. The Supreme Court in the said
case held that even though a critical comparison of the two names may disclose
some points of differences, yet an unwary purchaser of average intelligence
and imperfect recollection would be deceived by the overall similarity of the
two products.

20\. We find in the present case the Appellant's and Respondent/ Plaintiff's
mark are not only similar but their products are identical and are purchased
by the same class of customers and the said goods are sold through the same
trading channel. In our view the trinity of factors makes for a case for
confusion and consequently for passing off. Appellant's subsequent adoption of
a similar mark seems prima facie dishonest and no amount of user can cure it.
In case the injunction as granted by this Court is not continued, the use of
the same mark by the Appellant is likely to deceive the public at large.

21\. In B.K. Engineering Complaint vs. U.B.H.I. Enterprises (Registered)
reported in AIR 1985 Delhi 210, a Division Bench of FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page
12 of 17 this Court has held that trading must not only be honest but must not
even unintentionally be unfair. In Laxmikant V. Patel vs. Chetan Bhat Shah
reported in 2002 (24) PTC 1 (SC), the Apex Court has held that where there is
probability even in business, an injunction will be granted even though the
defendants adopted the name innocently.

22\. As far as the Appellant's argument that the word MOLA is common to the
trade and that variants of MOLA are available in the market, we find that the
Appellant has not been able to prima facie prove that the said 'infringers'
had significant business turnover or they posed a threat to Plaintiff's
distinctiveness. In fact, we are of the view that the Respondent/Plaintiff is
not expected to sue all small type infringers who may not be affecting
Respondent/Plaintiff business. The Supreme Court in NATIONAL BELL VS. METAL
GOODS reported in AIR 1971 SC 898 has held that a proprietor of a trademark
need not take action against infringement which do not cause prejudice to its
distinctiveness. In EXPRESS BOTTLERS SERVICES PVT. LTD. VS. PEPSI INC. &
OTHERS reported in 1989 (7) PTC 14 it has been held as under :-

> "....To establish the plea of common use, the use by other persons should be
> shown to be substantial. In the present case, there is no evidence regarding
> the extent of the trade carried on by the alleged infringers or their
> respective position in the trade. If the proprietor of the FAO (OS) No.
> 82/2008 Page 13 of 17 mark is expected to pursue each and every
> insignificant infringer to save his mark, the business will come to a
> standstill. Because there may be occasion when the malicious persons, just
> to harass the proprietor may use his mark by way of pinpricks.... The mere
> use of the name is irrelevant because a registered proprietor is not
> expected to go on filing suits or proceedings against infringers who are of
> no consequence.... Mere delay in taking action against the infringers is not
> sufficient to hold that the registered proprietor has lost the mark
> intentionally unless it is positively proved that delay was due to
> intentional abandonment of the right over the registered mark. This Court is
> inclined to accept the submissions of the respondent No. 1 on this
> point....The respondent No. 1 did not lose its mark by not proceeding
> against insignificant infringers..."

In fact, in DR. REDDY LABORATORIES VS. REDDY PAHARMACEUTICALS reported in 2004
(29) PTC 435 a Single Judge of this Court has held as under :-

> "..., the owners of trade marks or copy rights are not expected to run after
> every infringer and thereby remain involved in litigation at the cost of
> their business time. If the impugned infringement is too trivial or
> insignificant and is not capable of harming their business interests, they
> may overlook and ignore petty violations till they assume alarming
> proportions. If a road side Dhaba puts up a board of "Taj Hotel", the owners
> of Taj Group are not expected to swing into action and raise objections
> forthwith. They can wait till the time the user of their name starts harming
> their business interest and starts misleading and confusing their
> customers."

23\. The Appellant's other argument that the Respondent/Plaintiff has itself
permitted the use of the mark SIDHMOLA, SATMOLA AND CHATMOLA, does not impress
us. A private settlement executed by the Respondent/Plaintiff cannot offer a
licence to the world at large to FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 14 of 17 infringe
its mark HAJMOLA. Even otherwise we are of the view that use of similar marks
by a third party cannot be a defence to an illegal act of passing off. In
CENTURY TRADERS VS. ROSHAN LAL DUGGAR & CO. reported in AIR 1978 Delhi 250 a
Division Bench of this Court has held as under :-

> "Thus the law is pretty well settled that in order to succeed at this stage
> the appellant had to establish user of the aforesaid mark prior in point of
> time than the impugned user by the respondents."

In fact, in CASTROL LIMITED VS. A.K. MEHTA reported in 1997 PTC (17) 408 DB it
has been held that a concession given in one case does not mean that other
parties are entitled to use the same. Also in PRAKASH ROADLINE VS. PRAKASH
PARCEL SERVICE reported 1992 (2) Arbitration Law Reporter 174 it has been held
that use of a similar mark by a third party in violation of Plaintiff's right
is no defence.

24\. In the present case we also do not find that Respondent/Plaintiff's suit
is either barred by delay or laches or acquiescence. In fact, from the
documents on record, specially at pages 217, 352 and 361 in Paper Book, we
find that the Appellant's sales under the mark RASMOLA till the year 2004 were
rather insignificant. Even in the cause of action paragraph the
Respondent/Plaintiff has averred that though it had filed a notice of FAO (OS)
No. 82/2008 Page 15 of 17 opposition dated 25th July, 2007, yet it did not
find the Appellant's goods in the market till the first week of December 2007.
Consequently, at this stage we cannot draw the inference that the present suit
is barred by delay or laches. In any event, passing off is a recurring cause
of action and delay being a defence in equity would not be available if the
Defendant's conduct is fraudulent - as is in the present case. Consequently in
the present facts, delay and so called concurrent use, if any, cannot be a
ground for refusing interim injunction.

25\. As far as back to back advertisement is concerned, we are of the opinion
that keeping in view the Respondent/Plaintiff's advertisement budget and the
scale of advertisement carried out by the Respondent/Plaintiff it would be
difficult for us to presume at this stage, by a few isolated incidents that
the Respondent/Plaintiff was aware of the Appellant's product since 2005. In
fact, in AUTOMATIC ELECTRIC LIMITED referred to hereinabove it has been held
by this Court that publication of Defendant's advertisement in the same
magazine by itself is not sufficient to infer Plaintiff's awareness of use of
a similar mark.

26\. Consequently, the present appeal being devoid of merits is dismissed. The
parties are left to bear their own costs. However, FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page
16 of 17 keeping in view the facts of the case we request the learned Single
Judge to expeditiously dispose of the present suit preferably within six
months from today. Needless to mention, that the observations made are on a
prima facie view of matter and would not prejudice either of the parties at
the time of trial of the present suit.

Manmohan, J.

Manmohan Sarin, J.

th July 4 , 2008 rn FAO (OS) No. 82/2008 Page 17 of 17

