

Bombay High Court

Astra-Idl Limited vs Ttk Pharma Limited on 13 June, 1991

Equivalent citations: AIR 1992 Bom 35, 1992 (2) BomCR 298

Bench: S Jhunjhunuwala

ORDER

1\. The Plaintiff has filed this suit against the Defendant for permanent
injunction restraining the Defendant by itself, its servants, agents,
distributors and representatives from infringing the Plaintiff's trade mark
'Betaloc' registered under No. 326230 dated June 16, 1977 in Class 5 in
respect of Pharmaceutical preparation by use of the impugned trade mark
'Betalong' or any other trade mark deceptively similar to Plaintiff's said
registered trade mark 'Bctaloc' in relation to pharmaceutical preparalions and
from manufacturing, selling, offering for sale or otherwise dealing in
pharmaceutical preparations bearing the trade mark 'Betalong' or any other
mark deceptively simitar to Plaintiffs trade mark 'Betaloc' so as to pass off
the Defendants goods as and for the goods of the Plaintiff or in any other
manner whatsoever and for damages, costs and other reliefs as prayed for in
the Plaint filed. The Plaintiff has taken out the present Notice of Motion for
interim injunction in terms of permanent injunction prayed for in the Plaint
filed.

2\. As averred in the Plaint, the Plaintiff, a public limited company duly
incorporated and registered under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956,
is carrying on business of manufacture and sale of pharmaceutical and
medicinal products. The Plaintiff is proprietor of trade mark 'Betaloc' which
is registered under No. 326230 dated June 16, 1977, in Class 5 in respect of
the pharmaccu-ticals preparation. According to the plaintiff, by virtue of
registration of the trade mark 'Betaloc' under the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958, (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act"), and its long,
extensive and continuous use and reputation, the Plaintiff has acquired
proprietary rights in the said trade mark 'Betaloc' and is entitled to its
exclusive use in respect of all kinds of pharmaceutical preparations in Class
5 under the said Act and the Rules made thereunder. The Defendant is also a
limited company duly incorporated and registered under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956. The Defendant is also carrying on similar business in
manufacture and sale of pharmaceutical and medicinal products. It is the case
of the Plaintiff that in or about the month of November 1987, the Plaintiff
became aware of the manufacture and sale of pharmaceutical product under the
trade name 'Betalong' by the Defendant. The Plaintiff has been using the said
trade mark 'Betaloc' in respect of drug for the treatment of hyper tension,
angina pectoris, arrythanias, etc. The Defendant's product is also for the
treatment of hyper tension, angina pectoris, arrythanias, etc. On acquiring
the knowledge about the Defendant's said product, the Plaintiff realised that
its rights were being impaired by the Defendant and as such the Plaintiff
through its trade mark attorneys served a cease and desist notice dated
November 18, 1987 upon the Defendant. The'said letter was replied by the
Defendant vide its letter dated December 28, 1987. The Defendant refused to
comply with the requisitions made by the Plaintiff in the said cease and
desist notice- According to the Plaintiff, despite the said cease and desist
notice the Defendant has been continuing the use of the trade mark 'Betalong'
with a view to trade upon and benefit from the reputation and goodwill enjoyed
by the plaintiff's trade mark 'Betaloc'. The Plaintiff has averred that the
trade and public in normal course are likely to believe that the Defendant's
goods also emanates from the Plainiff. It is the case of the Plaintiff that
the Defendant has adopted the trade mark 'Betalong' with dishonest intention
and the Defendant has committed acts of infringement in adopting and using the
similar trade mark 'Betalong' in respect of the similar goods. According to
the Plaintiff, the said goods of the Defendant bearing the trade mark
'Betalong' are being passed off and are likely to be passed off as and for the
well-known goods of the Plaintiff sold under the trade mark 'Betaloc'.

3\. According to the Defendant, in the year 1986, the Defendant decided to
manufacture and launch a new product for controlling hyper tension and
treatment of angina pectoris and arrythanias. For that product the Defendant
coined and selected the trade mark 'Betalong' and in the month of March 1986
the Defendant applied for registration of that trade mark under the said Act.
The application of the Defendant is filed under No. 451743 on March 31, 1986
and is still pending. The new product of the Defendant was marketed and sold
under the trade mark 'Betalong' and the first sale thereof took place on
December 29, 1986. According to the Defendant, during the period between
December 29, 1986 to May 31, 1987, the Defendant has sold the said product
under the trade name 'Betalong' of the aggregate value of Rs. 2,90,265-64 and
during the period from June 1, 1987 to May 31, 1988, the Defendant has sold
the said product under the said trade mark 'Betalong' of the aggregate value
of Rs. 3,57,994-30. During the period commencing from June 1, 1988 to November
18, 1988, the Defendant had sold the said products under the said trade mark
'Betalong' of the aggregate value of Rs. 1,31,407-92 ps. Since November 18,
1988, in view of the ad interim order of injunction passed by this Court has
withheld the sale of the said product under the trade mark 'Betalong'. It is
the case of the Defendant that the said product 'Betalong' has been
continuously marketed and sold all over India till November 18, 1988 and that
the said proudct has been identified with the Defendant and has acquired good
reputation and goodwill. It is the case of the Defendant that the said product
'Betalong' is a drug which falls under Schedule 'H' to the Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules and as such can be sold only by a chemist holding appropriate licence
under the said Rules and that too on the prescription of a registered medical
practitioner. The Plaintiff's product 'Betaloc' is also a drug falling under
Schedule 'H' to the said rules and as such the plaintiffs product 'Betaloc'
can only be sold by a chemist holding appropriate licence under the said Rules
and that too on the prescription of a registered medical practitioner.

4\. According to the Defendant, the human heart allows blood vessles
(arteries) as Beta Receptors. Catecholomines which are a type of hormones act
on these beta receptors and bring about a reaction which causes abnormal
constriction of the heart as well as of the blood vessles resulting in hyper
tension. the Defendant's said product taken in appropriate doses blocks the
said action of Catecholomines on beta receptors and keeps the heart and the
blood vessles in normal condition. This blocking effect of the Defendant's
product is of a longer duration. The Defendant, therefore, in coining the word
trade mark for is said product took therword 'Beta' as representing 'beta
receptors' and coined it with the word 'long' representing the longer duration
for which it blocks or controls the action of the said harmones of beta
receptors. It is the case of the Defendant that the said trade mark 'Betaiong'
was coined and adopted by the Defendant for its said product without reference
to the Plaintiffs alleged trade mark 'Betaloc'. The Defendant was not aware of
the Plaintiff's alleged trade mark 'Betaloc'. The Defendant's product is in
the form of sustained release capsules which means that the requisite quantity
of the drug in requisite doses is released into the system over a period of 24
hours so as to ensure longer protection. This distinguishing feature of the
Defendant's product is well appreciated by the medical practitioner and as
such the medical practitioner are not likely to be confused or deceived in
selecting the right product by reason of the alleged similarity of the
Plaintiff's mark with that of the Defendant's said mark. It is further the
case of the Defendant that there are a number of similar products in the
market which are sold under the trade marks beginning which the word 'Beta'.
Some of these trade marks are 'Betabloc', 'Betadure', 'Betanole', 'Betacard',
'Betaspar' and 'Betazin'. The Defendant has denied that by virtue'Of long,
exclusive and continuous use the Plaintiffs trade mark 'Betaloc' is
distinctive of or is exclusively identified with the Plaintiffs goods.
Although according to the Plaintiff the annual sales of its product sold under
the trade mark 'Betaloc' for the period from July 1, 1987, to June 30, 1988,
aggregated to Rs. 1,72,26,000/-, the Defendant has denied the correctness of
the said annual sales figures of the Plaintiff. According to the Defendant,
its trade mark 'Betalong' is not similar to the Plaintiff's trade mark
'Bealoc' and the 'Beta' being common in the trade, the Plaintiff cannot have
any monopoly or exclusive right to the use of 'Beta' or the right to prevent
others from using that word. It is the case of the Defendant that the letters
'loc' which form the other part of the Plaintiff's trade mark 'Betaloc' do not
convey any idea nor do they have any meaning in the English language. The
pronunciation of the three letters 'loc' taken together is short and terse and
the sound thereof is soft. As against these features of the Plaintiff's trade
mark, the word 'long' which is the second part of the Defendant's trade mark
has a specific connotation, lengthy duration and the pronunciation of the word
'long' is lengthened and not terse. Thus, according to the Defendant, taking
Defendant's trade mark as a whole, its prominent feature phonetically is the
lengthy pronunciation with nasal sound having twang and connotation of a
duration opposed to short ways and prominent feature phonetically of
Plaintiffs trade mark taken as a whole is the short and terse pronunciation
lacking nasal sound with no connotation. Hence, according to the Defendant,
the two trade marks can by no means be called similar or deceptively or
confusingly similar and as such the Plaintiff cannot in law have any grievance
against or objection to the use by the Defendant of its trade mark 'Betalong'.

5\. Section 2(d) of the said Act reads as under:--

"2. Definition and interpretation:--

(d) "deceptively similar" - A mark shall be deemed to be deceptively similar
to 'another mark if it so nearly resembles that other mark as to be likely to
deceive or cause confusion."

6\. Mr. Tulzapurkar, the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff, has submitted that
for deciding the question of deceptive similarity, the Courts have laid down
that the following factors should be taken into consideration.

"(a) The nature of the marks i.e. whether the marks are word marks or label
marks or composite marks i.e. both word and label marks;

(b) The degree of resemblance between the marks phonetically, visually as well
as similarity in idea;

(c) The nature of the goods in respect of which they are used as trade marks;

(d) The similarity in the nature, character and purpose of the goods of the
rival traders;

(e) The class of purchasers who are likely to buy the goods bearing the marks,
thier level of education and intelligence and the degree of care they are
likely to exercise in purchasing the goods;

(f) The mode of purchasing the goods or placing orders for the goods; and

(g) Any other surrounding circumstances."

7\. Mr. Tulzapurkar has further submitted that weightage to be given to each
of the aforesaid factors depends on facts of each case and the same weightage
cannot be given to each factor in every case. In support of his submission,
Mr. Tulzapurkar has relied upon the case of Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satya Deo
Gupta, , where it has been held that the said Act does not lay down any
criteria for determining what is likely to deceive or cause confusion within
the meaning of Section 8(a) and Section 10(1) and therefore evey case must
depend on its own particular facts and the value of the authority lies not so
much in the actual decision as in the tests applied for determining what is
likely to deceive or cause confusion. In the case before the Supreme Court an
application for registration of trade name 'Lakshamandhara' in respect of
medicinal preparation for the alleviation of various ailments was opposed by
the proprietors of the trade name 'Amritdhara' which was already registered as
trade name in respect of similar medicinal preparation of the opponents. On
the question whether the trade name 'Laxmandhara' was likely to deceive the
public or cause confusion to trade, it was held that the question had to be
approached from the point of view of a man -of average intelligence and
imperfect recollection. To such a man, overall structural and phonetic
similarity of the two names 'Amritdhara' and 'Laxmandbara' was likely to
deceive or cause confusion. It was further held that the over all similarity
of the composile words 'Amritdhara' and 'Laxmandhara' had to be considered
having regard to the circumstance that the goods bearing the two names are
medicinal preparation of the same description. After considering various
authorities cited before the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court has held as
under :--

"(9) We agree that the use of the word, 'dhara' which literally means 'current
or stream' is not by itself decisive of the matter. What we have to consider
here is the overall similarity of the composite words having regard to the
circumstance that the goods bearing the two names are medicinal preparations
of the same description. We are aware that the admission of a mark is not to
be refused, because unusually stupid people, "fools or idiots", may be
deceived. A critical comparison of the two names may disclose some points of
difference but an unwary purchaser of average intelligence and imperfect
recollection would be deceived by the overall similarity of the two names
having regard to the nature of the medicine he is looking for with a somewhat
vague recollection that he had purchased a similar medicine on a previous
occasion with a similar name. The trade mark is the whole thing -- the whole
word has to be considered. In the case of the application to register
'Erectiks' (opposed by the proprietors of the trade mark 'Erector') Farwell,
J. said in William Bailey (Birmingham) Ltd.'s Application, (1935) 52 RFC 136 :

"I do not think it is right to take a part of the word and compare it with a
part of the other word, one word must be. Considered as a whole and compared
with the other word as a whole....I think it is dangerous method to adopt to
device the word up and seek to distinguish a portion of it from a portion of
the other word." Mr. Tulzapurkar has also relied upon the case of Hiralal
Parbhudas v. Ganesh Trading Company where it has been held as under:--

"In deciding the question of similarity of two marks, the following well
established principles are to be observed :-- (i) marks are remembered by
general impressions or by some significant detail rather than by a
photographic recollection of the whole, (ii) overall similarity is the
touchstone, (in) marks must be looked at from the first impression of a person
of average intelligence and imperfect recollection; (iv) overall structure,
phonetic similarity and similarity of idea arc important and both visual and
phonetic tests must be applied, (v) marks must be compared as a whole,
microscopic examination being impermissible, and (vi) the broad and salient
features must be considered for which the marks must not be placed side by
side to find out differences in design. In addition, the nature of the
commodity, the class of purchasers, the mode of purchase and other surrounding
circumstances must also be taken into consideration."

8\. Reliance has also been placed on behalf of the plaintiff on the case of
Corn Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food Products Ltd., reported in ATR
1960 SC 142. In this case it has been held that in deciding a question of
similarity between the two marks the marks have to be considered as a whole.
The Supreme Court has further held that in deciding the question of similarity
between the two marks, the Court has to approach it from the point of view of
a man of average intelligence and of imperfect recollection. To such a man the
overall structural and phonetic similarity and the similarity of the idea in
the two marks is reasonably likely to cause a confusion between them. The
Supreme Court has further held that the absolute identity of the two
competitive marks or their close resemblance is only one of the tests for
determining the question of likelihood of deception or confusion. Trade
connection between different goods is another such test. In the case before
the Supreme Court respondent had applied for registration of the mark
'Gluvita' used with reference to biscuits manufactured by it. The appellant,
who had been using the registered mark 'Glucovita' with reference to his
glucose with vitamins opposed the application under S. 8(a) of the said Act.
It was established tha the applicant's trade mark had acquired a reputation
amongst the buying public. Applying the said test the Supreme Court held that
the com-modites concerned were so connected as to make confusion or deception
likely in view of the similarity of the two trade marks. It was further held
that apart from the syllable 'co'in the appellant's marks, the marks were
identical, that syllable was not such as would enable the buyers in our
country to distinguish the one mark from the other. Hence, the respondent's
mark could not be registered. It is also held by the Supreme Court that mere
existence of series of marks registered or unregistered having a common
feature or a common syllable is by itself not sufficient. The applicant is
required to prove that these series of marks have acquired a reputation by
user in the market. The onus of proving such user is of course on the
applicant who wants to rely on those marks. In the instant case, apart from
the syllabic 'ng' in the Defendant's mark, the two marks are identical. That
syllable is not such as would enable the buyers in our country to distinguish
the one mark from the other. Further, although the Defendant has stated that
there are many marks with prefix 'Beta' in existence and has also relied upon
Indian Pharmaceutical Guide 1977 as also on Indian Pharmaceutical Guide 1990,
the Defendant has not been able (o prove that the said marks are in use. The
-Defendant has also not established that 'Beta' in common to trade. No
instance of the other marks being in use has been given by the defendant nor
any invoice pertaining to availability of the product in the market has been
relied upon by the Defendant.

9\. Mr. Tulzapurkar has next relied upon the case, viz. In the matter of an
application by Egg. Products Ltd. reported in (1922) 39 RPC 155. In this case
an application was made to register the mark "Egall". The said application was
opposed by the prorietors of a trade mark "Egrol". The Rcgistar having refused
the application, the applicants appealed to the Chancery Division which was
decided by Sargent J. In this case it has been held that in cases of alleged
confusion. the interest of the public was more important consideration than
the relevant rights of the parties. On the fads of that case, it was held that
the first syllable 'Eg' could not be disregarded because it had some relation
to the nature of the goods but that in such cases the totality of the two
marks must be considered, that "Egall" was so similar to "Egrol" as to make
confusion likely. The appeal was thus dismissed.

10\. Mr. Tulzapurkar has rightly submitted that the question of likelihood of
confusion had to be decided by comparison of marks as a whole. In support of
his submission, Mr. Tulzapurkar had relied upon the case of F. Hoffimann-La
Roche and Co. Ltd. v. Geoffrey Manners and Co. Pvt. Ltd. re-ported'in MR 1970
SC 2062. In that case the appellants had applied for registration of the trade
mark "Protovit". The application was granted and the appellants mark was
registered in Class V in respect of pharmaceutical preparation for human use
and for veterinary use, infants' and invalids' foods. The appellants
thereafter used that mark on multi-vitamin preparations in liquid and tablet
forms and their goods were sold under that mark since the year 1951. In
January 1957, the respondents therein applied for registration of their mark
'Dropovit' in respect of medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations and
substances. The application was registered and since the advertisement of the
respondents' application escaped the notice of the appellants, the appellants
did not oppose the registration. Thereafter, the appellants applied for
rectification of the Register by removal therefrom of the respondents' trade
mark. The ground urged in support of the application was that the respondents'
mark so nearly resembled the appellants' mark as to be likely to deceive ot
cause confusion. The appellants thereafter applied for amendment of the
application and an additional ground was taken that 'Dropovit' was not an
invented word. The application for amendment was allowed by the Registrar. The
amended application was opposed by the respondents. The Joint Registrar
rejected the application for rectification holding that 'Dropovit' was not
deceptively similar to 'Protovit' and that the word 'Dropovit' considered as a
whole was not deceptive. The matter was taken in appeal to this Court. The
appeal was dismissed. The appellants then preferred an appeal under Letters
Patent but the appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court.
Before the Supreme Court, the appeal was brought by certificate from the
judgment of this Court in the appeal. While considering the test for
comparison of the two words marks for-mualted by Lord Parker in Pianotist Co.
Ltd.'s application (1908) 23 RPC 774, the Supreme Court has held as under (at
p. 2065 of AIR):

"It is also important that the marks must be compared as a whole It is not
right to take a portion of the word and say that because that portion of the
word differs from the corresponding portion of the word in the other case
there is no sufficient similarity to cause confusion. The true test is whether
the totality of the proposed trade mark is such that it is likely to cause
deception or confusion or mistake in the minds of persons accustomed to the
existing trade mark."

11\. Mr. Tulzapurkar has also relied upon the case of "Accutron" trade mark,
reported in 1966 RPC 152. In that case an application to register the word
'Accutron' in respect of clocks and watches was opposed by the registered
proprietors of the marks 'Accurist' registered in respect of wrist watches,
and 'Accularm' registered in respect of alarm clocks. The Registrar found that
although the marks viewed side by side or compared phonetically were not
confusingly similar, nevertheless there was a reasonable probability of
confusion taking into_account imperfect recollection, and the fact that both
the applicants' and the opponents' marks would be used in very small letters
on the faces of watches. Accordingly he refused registration. On appeal to the
High Court the applicants contended that the opponents could not obtain any
monopoly in the word 'accurate' by means of their registration, and therefore
distinctiveness of the opponents marks had to be found other than in first
letters 'accu'. The High Court held:

i) that as the mark applied for and the opponents' marks were invented words,
it was not proper to disregard such elements of the words which were deceptive
and therefore the question of likelihood of confusion had to be decided by a
comparison of the marks as a whole;

ii) that on comparison of the marks it appeared that there was a likelihood of
confusion which the applicants who had not used their mark, had been able to
dispel by evidence. The application was therefore rightly dismissed."

12\. In this connection, Mr. Patel, the learned Counsel appearing for the
Defendant, has submitted that where there are several marks with common prefix
proper attention should be given to the termination of the marks. In support
of his submission, Mr. Patel has relied upon the case reported in (1978) RPC
406- In that case, the applicant sought to register "Rheumation" in class 1 in
Part A of the register in respect of diagnostic laboratory reagents. Opponents
objected on the ground that the mark did not meet the requirements of Ss. 9
and 10 of Trade Marks Act, 1938 and that the mark conflicted with their mark
"Rheumanosticon" registered in classes 1 and 5. It was, inter alia, held in
that case that despite common prefix "Rheuma" there were special factors in
that case winch ruled out any likelihood of confusion, in particular the
attention which laboratory staff would be likely to pay to the terminations of
the marks when ordering diagnostic preparations.

13\. Mr. Patel also relied upon the case of Aquasoutum v. Cohen and Wilks,
reported in (1909) 26 RPC 651. In that case, the plaintiffs who used
"Acquasontum" as the name of garments sold by them, brought an action to
restrain the Defendants from passing off garments not of the plaintiffs'
manufacture as and for garments of such manufacture. The plaintiffs therein
complained to the use of the name "Aquatite" by the defendants. Holding that
what the defendants therein was doing was not, having regard to the
surrounding circumstances calculated to deceive, the action of the plaintiffs
therein was dismissed with costs.

14\. Mr. Patel has also relied upon the case in the matter of the application
of R. K. Dundas Ltd. for the registration of a trade mark reported in (1955)
72 RPC 151. In that case Dundas Ltd. had applied to register the word "Dustic"
for adhesives for industrial purposes. The said application was opposed by B.
B. Coy Ltd. on the grounds (inter alia) that the word "Dustic" was not an
invented word, being merely a misspelling of "Does stick"; that the word had
direct reference to the character or quality of the goods; and that it was
liable to be confused with other registered marks and in particular with the
mark "Bostik" registered by the opponents therein for certain classes of
adhesives. It was stated by the applicants therein and admitted by the
opponents therein that the word "Dustic"was derived from the first two letters
of Dundas and the termination 'stic' or 'stik' commonly used in names of
adhesives. The Asstt. Comptroller held that :

i) the word 'Dustic' was an invented word and has no reference to the
character or to the quality of the goods;

ii) it was not liable to be confused with opponents' mark 'Bostik' regard
being had to the number of marks for adhesives ending in 'stic' or a like
termination;

iii) that registration of the mark applied for should be allowed.

The opponents in that case appealed to the Court and Justice Lloyd-Jacob, held
that :

i) "Dustic" was an invented word;

ii)'the decision of the Asstt. Comptroller to the effect that it was not
liable to cause confusion was correct;

iii) the appeal was dismissed.

15\. Mr. Patel has further submitted that visually also the mark 'Betalong' is
different from the mark 'Betaloc'. He has further submitted (hat the syllable
'g' in the mark 'Betalong' trailed below and as such the mark 'Betalong' is
visually different than the mark 'Betaloc'.

16\. As held in the case (Supra) the totality of the mark is required to be
considered to hold as to whether or not the mark is deceptively similar.

17\. In the instant case in deciding whether the word 'Betalong' is
deceptively similar to the word 'Betaloc', each of the two words must,
therefore, be taken as a whole word. The words are so similar that there is
reasonable probability of confusion between the words both from the visual and
phonetic point of view. It is not a matter for microscopic inspection, but to
be taken from the general and even casual point of view of a customer walking
into a shop. As observed above in the instant case, apart from the syllable
'ng' in defendants' mark, the two marks are identical. Even if proper
attention is paid to the termination of the marks, the likelihood of confusion
being caused cannot be ruled out. The mark 'Betaloc' is too near and so
similar to the mark 'Betalong' as to make the confusion likely. In my view,
Mr. Tulzapurkar has rightly placed reliance upon the case of Ranbaxy
Laboratories Ltd. v. Dua Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. decided by B. N. Kirpal J.
on July 22, 1988 in I. A. No. 8916/87 in suit No. 2614/87 in the High Court of
Delhi in support of his submission that even phonetically the two marks
'Betaloc' and 'Betalong' are similar. In that case, the plaintiffs who were
registered proprietors of the trade mark. 'Calmpose' for medicinal preparation
filed a suit for infringment and passing off against the defendants therein
who commenced manufacturing and marketing a single medicinal preparation under
the trade mark 'Calmprose' and applied for an ex parte ad interim injunction.
In its reply the defendants therein contended that the two trade marks
'Calmpose' and Calmprose' were phonetically different and that in any case
since the medicine could be sold by chemists only on the written prescription
of a registered medical practitioner, there could be little likelihood of
deception or confusion arising by the use of the marks. While making absolute
the ad interim injunction, the Delhi High Court held that the marks 'Calmpose'
and 'Calmprose' were phonetically similar. According to Mr. Patel, the said
decision has no applicability to the facts of the present case. I see no
reason why the said decision has no applicability to the facts of the present
case.

18\. In my view in the instant case, phonetically visually and structurally
both the marks are similar. Actual deception is not necessary to be proved.
What is material in the circumstances is likelihood of deception.

19\. Mr. Patel has submitted that since medicines could be sold by the
chemists only on written prescription of a registered medical practitioner,
there is no likelihood of confusion or deception by use of both the said
marks. In support of his submission, Mr. Patel has relied upon an unreported
decision of this Court in the case of Parke Davis and Co. v. Onyx Laboratories
Pvt. Ltd. in Suit No. 749/71 delivered by Vimadalal J. on July 13, 1972. In
that case a notice of motion was taken out by the plaintiffs who are a very
wellknown company manufacturing drugs for an injunction restraining the
defendants therein pending the hearing and final disposal of the suit, from
using in relation to certain pharmaceutical and medicinal preparations labels
and cartons deceptively similar to the articles and cartons of the plaintiffs
so as to pass off the defendants' goods and products as and for the goods and
products of the plaintiffs, as well as for an interlocutory injunction
restraining the defendants from printing and using the said labels and cartons
so as to constitute an infringement of the plaintiffs' copyright in the
artistic work contained in their correspondence. Mr, Patel has then submitted
that the class of persons to use the goods and the nature of goods as also the
mode of purchase are the factors which are to be taken into consideration in
deciding as to likelihood of confusion or deception being caused by the use of
the marks. He has further submitted that from the nature of the goods, both
being medicines for Ireatment of heart ailment it is likely that customers
would obtain prescription from a doctor and show it to the chemist before the
purchase. In such a case, in the submission of Mr. Patel the chance of
confusion is remote. In support of his this submission, Mr. Patel has put
reliance on the case of F. Hoffimanna-La Roche & Co. Ltd. (supra).

20\. Mr. Patel has also placed reliance on the case of M/s. Johann A. Wulfing
v. Chemical Industrial and Pharmaceutical Laboratories Ltd. , where the
question of mode of purchase has been considered for deciding as to likelihood
of causing confusion by use of the marks. In that case, the trade mark
'Complamina' of M/s. Johann A. Wulfing was registered for a medicinal and
pharmaceutical preparation and was sold in the form of ampoules and tablets
for the treatment of vascular disorders. M/s. Chemical Industrial and
Pharmaceutical Laboratories Ltd. who were carrying on like business filed an
application for registration their name the mark 'Ciplamina' proposed to be
used by them in respect of pharmaceulical and medicinal preparatio ,. The said
application was opposed on the ground that the proposed mark was deceptively
similar to the said registered mark. On the facts of the said case it was held
that there was no deceptive similarity between the said two marks. No person,
be he a layman of average intelligence and imperfect recollection or a medical
practitioner, is likely to confuse one for the other. The visual impression of
the two words is not conducive to any such confusion. It was also held in that
case tha! there was phonetic dissimilarity between the two words. So far as
the instant case is concerned, as observed hereinabove, phonetically, visually
and structurally both the marks are similar.

21\. While putting reliance on the case of Sterwin A.G. v. Brocadcs (Great
Britain) Ltd. in 1979 RPC 481, Mr. Patel submitted that doctors and
pharmacists were trained to take very great care in their work and if in
doubt, to check before acting and since the medicines are to be dispensed on
medical preparations, there is no likelihood of any confusion being caused. In
the Sterwin's case the likelihood of confusion being caused was held not to be
there in relation to the two products as them marketed, viz., 'Danol' (for
suppression of menstrual cycle in capsul form) and 'De-noP (for ulcer in
liquid form). When the defendants in that case wished to introduce a solid
presentation of 'De-nol', the plaintiffs therein having become aware of the
defendants' intention sought an injunction to restrain passing off on a quia
timet basis. It was urged that if 'De-nol' was sold in a solid form there
would be substantial likelihood of confusion with plaintiffs' products
'Danol'. The defendants therein while admitting the likelihood of confusion
and deception sought analogus injunctive relief against the plaintiffs. It was
held :

i) that in relation fo the two products as presently marketed there had been
no actual confusion and there was no likelihood of confusion as doctors and
pharmacists were trained to take very great care in their work and if in doubt
to check before acting;

ii) that a real likelihood of confusion would only arise if the defendants
produced and marketed a solid formulation of their product;

iii) that the defendants might produce a solid formulation of 'De-nol' was,
when the plaintiff's introduced their products, no more than a limited
possibility. The plaintiffs' course of action with regard to choice of mark
had therefore been reasonable.

iv) Accordingly the plaintiffs were entitled to judgment, but, since there was
no immediate market threat, (his was an inappropriate case for injunctive
relief.

22\. Mr. Tulzapurkar has submitted that although the medicines are dispensed
on medical prescription the marks being visually, phonetically and
structurally similar, the likelihood of confusion being caused is greater. In
support of his/this submission, Mr. Tulzapurkar has rightly relied upon the
case of Burroughs Welcome (India) Ltd. v.G. K. Sharma and King Scientific
Research Centre reported in (1989) 14 (2) IPLR 60. In that case the plaintiffs
were the proprietors of the trade mark 'Septran' registered in 1969 and in
continuous use since 1974 for a medicinal preparation in liquid and tablet
form for treatment of respiratory and urinary ailments. The plaintiffs were
selling 'Septran' tablets in strips packing and these strips were in turn
packed in cartons. The plaintiffs claimed to be the owners of copyright in
'Septran' strips and 'Septran' cartons as original artistic works and had
obtained registration of the artistic work on cartons under the Copyright Act
in the year 1974. The defendant No. 1. was carrying on business in the name
and style of King Scientific Research Centre at Kandivli, Bombay and also at
Kota, Rajasthan. Defendant No. 2 King Scientific Research Centre was a firm
carrying on manufacture and business of medical preparations at Kota Rajasthan
with an office in Kandivali. Bombay. The plaintiffs found that the defendants
were selling tablets under the mark 'Celran' in strips and cartons identical
with those of the plaintiffs. The suit was therefore filed by the plaintiffs
for infringement and application for ad-interim injunction was therein made
which was granted. The Court, inter alia, held that :

i) the defendants' mark was deceptively similar to plaintiffs' registered
trade mark and the get-up, colour scheme, etc. of the rival strips and cartons
were identical;

ii) that the defendants were using the infringing mark and deceptive cartons
with a view to trading on the plaintiffs' reputation and their contention that
there could not be any deception since the medicines needed doctor's
prescription was not acceptable as the defendants' mark and phonetically
similar to the plaintiffs' mark.

23\. Mr. Tulzapurkar also relied upon the case of Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd.
(Supra). In that case the Delhi High Court while holding that the marks
'Calmpose' and 'Calmprose' were phonetically similar also held that it was not
unknown that the medicines were also available across the counter in the shops
of various chemists and that the test to be adopted is not only of the doctor
who is giving the prescription but was whether an unwary customer who went to
purchase the medicine could make a mistake. In my view, in the present
circumstances, doctor's prescription factor has lost its importance since the
reality of the situation cannot be ignored. In India scheduled drugs which are
to be sold under doctor's prescriplion are even sold without production of
doctor's prescription and as such reduces the weightage that can be given to
this aspect of the matter while considering the question of deceptive
similarity. The Court cannot close its eyes to the existing circumstances and
judicial notice of the factual aspects in existence has to be taken. In case
where the fact of the medicines being sold on doctror's prescription has been
taken into consideration for deciding the there was no likelihood of confusion
being created, the marks were not visually, phonetically and structurally
similar. In the instant case the two marks 'Betaloc' and 'Betalong' being
visually, phonetically and structurally similar and so close to each other
that it outweighs the weightage to be given to the factor that the goods are
scheduled drugs. The two marks are to be compared as a whole and the prefix
'Beta' cannot be ignored in the matter of such comparison.

24\. Mr. Patel has then submitted that even if the defence of the medicines
being available on doctor's prescription is ignored, the two marks are not
similar. Mr. Patel has put reliance in the matter of application by Bayer
Products Ltd. and In the matter of opposition by A. Wander Ltd. reported in
(1947) 64 RPC 125. In that case an application to register 'Diasil' for
pharmaceutical preparations for internal and external use was opposed by the
proprietors of marks 'Alasil' registered in respect of same description of
goods. On the facts of that case, the Court of Appeal held that the likelihood
of confusion between the marks if the applicants' marks were registered and
used in respect of sulpha-diazine preparations was too remote to justify
refusing the registration. The possibility of a person confusing the
opponents' and applicants' preparations on his own medicine table rested on
the assumption of a number of coinciding circumstances, all of which were
unlikely to occur simultaneously. In that case on the facts thereof, the Court
took the view that neither of the initial syllable 'Di' or 'A1' has any
characteristic or distinctive feature, anyting forcefully or emphatically that
will leave such an impression on the hearer's mind as will entirely outweigh
the fact that the last two syllables of the words are identical and will
enable it to remember the one word so clearly and distinctively that he would
not be likely to confuse it with the other word. As observed earlier, in the
instant case, the two marks are so close and so nearer and visually and
phonetically and structurally similar that the likelihood of confusion is
greater.

25\. Mr. Patel has also relied upon the case of Himalaya Drug Co. v. Hindustan
Antibiotics Ltd. in Misc. Petn. No. 159 of 1987 decided on March 22, 1990 by
Variava J. of this Court. The petitioners in that case have been manufacturers
and dealers in medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations and registered owners
of trade mark 'Pilex'. The said mark is used in respect of ayurvedic
preparation for treatment of piles in the form of ointments and tablets. The
1st respondent filed an application for registration of the trade mark
consisting of the word 'Prilex' in class 5 in respect of antibiotic medicinal
preparations. The petitioners opposed the said application. The Registrar
ordered registration of 1st respondent's trade mark 'Prilex' and being
aggrieved from the said order the said Misc. Petition by way of appeal was
filed by the petitioners. In that case the registration of the trade mark
'Prilex' was allowed since the petitioners' product 'Pilex' is an ayurvedic
product and the 1st respondents' products 'Prilex' is an allopathic product
and that the 1st respondents' product being schedule-H drug could only be
available against prescription under the Drugs Rules, In the circumstances of
the case it was held that there was no possibility of confusion and/or
deception.

26\. Mr. Patel has then submitted that the mark 'Betalong' has been honestly
adopted by the defendants and as such there is no question of defendants being
injuncted.from using the said mark. Mr. Tulzapurkar has submitted that the
alleged honesty in adoption of the mark 'Betalong' by the Defendants is
irrelevant in an action for infringement and passing off and the absence of an
intention to deceive is not a defence. In this respect Mr. Tulzapurkar has
relied upon para 16-16 at page 357 of Rerly's Law of Trade Marks and Trade
Names (12th Edition), which reads as under:--

"Passing-off cases are often cases of deliberate and intentional
misrepresentation, but it is well settled that fraud is not a necessary
element of the right of action, and the absence of an intention to deceive is
not a defence. Moreover, literal truth is not necessarily innocent of
misrepresentation.

If a man makes a statement which is true, but which carried with it a false
representation and induces the belief that his goods are the plaintiff's
goods, he will be restrained by injunction. He cannot rely on the fact that
his statement is literally and accurately true if, notwithstanding the truth,
it carries with it a false representation.

Proof of fraudulent intention may, however, materially assist a plaintiff in
establishing probability of deception."

27\. Mr. Patel has then submitted that the totality of factors should be
looked into arid if the plaintiff has reasonable chance of success in the suit
at the final hearing, then only the plaintiff should be granted the relief in
the present Notice of Motion. In support of his/ this submission Mr. Patel has
put reliance on the case of Biddle Sawyer Pvt. Ltd. v. Lord's Homeopathic
Laboratory in Appeal 244 of 1989 decided by this Court on March 15, 1989,
(Lentin and Mehta JJ). In that case the appellants sought an injunction to
restrain the respondents from using the trade mark 'Slimex'. The appellant's
trade mark is 'Slimerax'. The appellants' products consisted of tablets used
for the purpose of reducing obesity. The respondents' product is a homeopathic
medicine which is available in liquid form. It is available in bottles. On the
facts of that case it was held that the two trade marks 'Slimex' and
'Slimerax' did not appear to be deceptively similar and as such certain
conditions like filing accounts every six months by the respondents were
imposed since it was doubtful as to whether the appellants had reasonable
chance of succeeding in the suit at the final hearing. So far as the facts of
the instant case are concerned, as observed here-inabove, the two marks are
visually, phonetically and structurally similar and the impugned mark of the
Defendant is so near and close to the registered mark of the Plaintiff that it
is likely to cause confusion if the Defendant is permitted to use the said
mark 'Betalong'. On the facts of the case and looking to the totality of
factors, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has reasonable chance of success in
the suit at its final hearing.

28\. Applying the three-fold tests of phonetic, visual and structural
similarity and considering the various authorities cited and referred
hereinabove, I am of the opinion that the Plaintiff has made out a very strong
prima facie case for grant of interlocutory reliefs as prayed for in the
Notice of Motion.

29\. Mr. Patel has lastly submitted that the Defendant is in the market since
the year 1986 and the suit has been filed by the Plaintiff on September 30,
1988 and as such, the Plaintiff is guilty of gross delay in approaching this
Court and therefore not entitled to any interim relief from this Court.
According to Mr. Tulzapurkar, the Plaintiff is not guilty of any delay in
approaching this Court. Immediately on acquiring knowledge of the Defendant
marketing its product 'Betalong', the Plaintiff had served notice upon the
Defendant on November 18, 1987 which was replied by the Defendant on January
4, 1988 to which a rejoinder was given by the Plaintiff on January 28, 1988.
Since there was no compliance by the Defendant, a further notice by way of
reminder was served upon the Defendant on March 17, 1988 and the suit was
thereafter filed. Accordingly there is no delay on the part of the Plaintiff
in approaching this Court. Even assuming that there has been some delay on the
part of the Plaintiff in approaching this Court as contended by the Defendant,
firstly the question of delay has to be balanced against the likelihood of the
Plaintiff's ultimately succeeding in the action and where the strength of the
Plaintiffs prima facie case is very strong, the Plaintiff's delay in filing
the action would not disentitle the Plaintiff to relief and it would be right
to grant rather than to withhold the interlocutory injunction prayed for. As
stated above, in my opinion, the Plaintiff has made out a very strong prima
facie case for grant of interlocutory relief and under the circumstances I
hold that delay, if any, on the part of the Plaintiff in filing the suit does
not disentitle it to interlocutory relief on this Motion. Moreover, as held by
the High Court at Delhi in the case of Hindustan Pencils Pvt. Ltd. v. India
Station-ery Products Co. , even where there is an honest concurrent user by
the Defendant then inordinate delay or laches may defeat the claim of damages
or rendition of accounts but the relief of injunction should not be refused.
This is so because it is in the interest of general public, which is the third
party in such cases, which has to be kept in mind.

30\. In the circumstances the Notice of Motion is made absolute in terms of
prayers (a) and (b). The defendant is directed to pay the cqsts of the Notice
of Motion to the Plaintiff.

31\. Order accordingly.

