

Allahabad High Court

S.S. Pharmaceutical (P) Ltd. vs Additional Collector, Central ... on 30
August, 1991

Equivalent citations: 1992 (38) ECR 495 Allahabad

Author: A Misra

Bench: A Misra, R Gulati

JUDGMENT A.P. Misra, J.

1\. Heard learned Counsel for the petitioner and Sri V.K. Singh learned Senior
Standing Counsel appearing for Union of India.

2\. By means of the present writ petition No. 1126 of 1991 and the other writ
petition No. 1435 of 1990, both filed by the same petitioner, the petitioner
has challenged the order dated 27.3.1991, Annexure IV to the writ petition No.
1126 of 1991 and the order dated 14.9.1990, Annexure-3 to writ petition No.
1435 of 1990. The main contention on behalf of the petitioner is that the
petitioner company is not related to M/s Poonam and Company and M/s Kharbanda
Drugs Corporation. In these impugned orders the authorities have held that
they are related. The petitioner has raised a number of grounds contending
that the said finding is not sustainable, and further raised the question of
limitation and power of issuance of notice by the Assistant Collector, we find
from the averments made in writ petition No. 1126 of 1991 that the show cause
notice was issued earlier than the impugned notice, and the petitioner
submitted price list and classification list before the Assistant Collector
Central Excise, Allahabad for approval of the price list under the Central
Excise Act and the Rules framed thereunder-for not related persons. The
petitioner-company further submits that earlier after enquiry and hearing on
various dates the authority concerned was convinced that the company was not a
related person to Poonam and Co. and Kharbanda Drugs Corporation and, thus,
approved the price list on 22.11.1988. Against the said approved price list
the Assistant Collector, Central Excise preferred in appeal before the
Collector Appeals (New Delhi) now Allahabad. The petitioner company also
submitted objections against the said and the appeal is still pending before
the Collector (Appeals).

3\. The argument of the petitioner before us is that since in earlier
proceedings the petitioner is held not related person, hence the finding by
the authority in the impugned order to the contrary is not sustainable.
However, we do not like to go into the merits of the contentions of the
petitioner in the aforesaid two writ petitions. We find that as disclosed by
the petitioner itself, the matter is pending before the Appellate Authority
for consideration in the appeal filed by the respondent against the finding
that the petitioner is not a related person. In the impugned order in the
present petitions, it is held that the petitioner-company is related to the
aforesaid two firms. It is not in dispute that the impugned orders are
appealable under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, as against the
similar orders appeals have been preferred by the respondents. In view of
this, it would be appropriate for the appellate authority to consider the
matter in case the petitioner's appeals against the two impugned orders are
filed within six weeks from today along with a stay application and waiver
application. Recovery proceedings which we have stayed in writ petition No.
1436 of 1990 by order dated 30.11.1990, shall be operative for a period of
eight weeks from today and shall be subject to the order passed on the waiver
and stay application to be moved within specified time as indicated above. The
appeals shall not be dismissed by the Appellate Authority being barred by time
in case it is filed within the specified period as aforesaid, similarly the
recovery proceedings as against the petitioner in writ petition No. 1126 of
1991 in pursuance to the impugned order dated 27.3.1991 shall remain stayed
for a period of eight weeks from today provided the petitioner furnishes
security for the same amount to the satisfaction of the respondent within one
month, which may be other than cash or bank guarantee. This order shall also
be operative only for a period of 8 weeks subject to the order passed on the
waiver and stay application.

4\. In case the applications for stay and waiver are filed along with the
appeals as directed above, the appellate authority shall dispose them
expeditiously taking into account all the facts and circumstances of the case.

5\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner further urged that though by omission,
he could not annex the copy of an order passed by its court nor could he state
that the authority passing the impugned orders has also not complied with the
directions issued by this Court earlier. In absence of any averment or
material on record of these writ petitions, it would not be possible for us to
effectively come to a conclusion either way. However, since we are directing
the petitioner to file appeals before the appellate authority itself, it shall
be open to the petitioner to take all such picas in the appeals as may be
available to it under law, and, we have no hesitation that the appellate
authority in case such grounds are raised, will also consider the same while
disposing of the appeal/appeals.

6\. Subject to the above directions, the writ petitions shall stand finally
disposed of.

7\. A certified copy of this order may be issued to the petitioner if possible
within 4 days on payment of requisite fee.

