

Supreme Court of India

Syed Rahimuddin vs Director General, C.S.I.R. And ... on 11 January, 2001

Equivalent citations: 2001 (89) FLR 427, JT 2001 (3) SC 609, (2001) IILLJ 1246
SC, (2001) 9 SCC 575, (2001) 2 UPLBEC 1541

Bench: G Pattanaik, U Banerjee

JUDGMENT

1\. An order of compulsory retirement in a departmental proceeding under the
provisions of Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Rules (for short the CCS Rules) is the subject matter of challenge in this
appeal. Against the delinquent-respondent in accordance with the procedure
prescribed under the CCS Rules a set of charges having been leveled. He was
called upon to answer those charges in a regular inquiry. Before the Enquiring
Officer the delinquent prayed for production of certain documents and in fact,
an order was passed by the Enquiring Officer directing the departmental
authorities to give copies of those documents to the delinquent. But,
notwithstanding the same the allegation of the delinquent is that some of
those documents had not been produced. Ultimately, on the basis of the
materials produced, the Enquiring Officer came to the conclusion that the
charges against the delinquent have been proved by the departmental
authorities. On the basis of the said report of the Enquiring Officer, the
disciplinary authority imposed the punishment of compulsory retirement after
coming to the conclusion that the charges against the delinquent must be said
to have been established beyond doubt. The delinquent then preferred an appeal
before the appellate authority, but the same having been dismissed, he
approach the Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench (the Tribunal) ,
The Tribunal by the impugned order came to the conclusion that there has been
no invalidity in the inquiry proceeding nor can it be said that there has been
an violation of principles of natural justice and, therefore, the order of
punishment cannot be interfered with. The Tribunal having dismissed the
application filed by the delinquent, he is in appeal before this Court.

2\. Mr. H.S. Gururaja Rao, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant, seriously contended before us that notwithstanding the order of the
Enquiry Officer directing production of the documents, non-production of some
of those documents itself tantamounts to denial of reasonable opportunity to
the delinquent to defend his case and the Tribunal, therefore, was in error in
not accepting the said contention raised before it. The learned counsel
further urged that the Architect who was the key defence witness in the case,
though had been summoned but did not depose on being pressurised by the
Enquiry Officer and that itself would vitiate the ultimate conclusion of the
Enquiry Officer. The learned counsel further contended that the conclusion
arrived at by the Enquiry Officer must be held to be conclusion without any
evidence and as such those conclusions could not have formed a basis of the
ultimate decision of the disciplinary authority. He lastly submitted that bias
writ large on the order of the Enquiring Officer itself and though this
contention had been raised before the Tribunal, but the Tribunal did not apply
its mind to the relevant parts of the orders of the Enquiring Officer and
brushed aside the said contention of the delinquent.

3\. We have considered each of the contentions raised by the learned counsel
for the appellant, but we do not find any substance in any one of them. It is,
no doubt, true that the delinquent had made an application for production of
certain documents and the Enquiring Officer did pass an order for production
of those documents. It also transpires that some of those documents I were
produced any yet some of them had not 1 been produced. When a grievance was
made on this score before the Enquiry Officer by filing a representation of
3rd of August, 1989, the said Enquiring Officer considered the said grievance
and came to the conclusion that the very fact that though the inquiry
continued from 3-7-1989 to 6-7-1989 and the delinquent had been cross-
examining the departmental witnesses, yet no grievance had been made on the
score of non-production of any of those vital documents which, according to
the delinquent, could have established the defence case. The Enquiring Officer
came to the conclusion that the so-called representation D/- 3rd of August,
1989 making a grievance is a dilly dally tactics on the part of the charged
officer and the sole intention was to stall the inquiry by any means. In view
of the aforesaid conclusion of the Enquiring Officer in its order disposing of
the grievance made on 3-8-1989 we do not find any substance in the argument of
the learned counsel that in fact the delinquent was really prejudiced by non-
supply of some of the so-called vital documents though for production of the
same the Enquiring Officer had ordered. The Tribunal, therefore rightly came
to the conclusion that such alleged non-production cannot be held to be a
denial of reasonable opportunity to the delinquent in making his defence.

4\. So far as the grievance of the examination of the Architect is concerned,
we find that before the Tribunal no whisper has been made that the said
Architect was terrorised by the Enquiring Officer which resulted on the part
of the Architect not to depose in favour of the delinquent. In paragraph 18 of
the order of the Tribunal the grievance relating to the examination of
Architect has been dealt with and it appears that the said Architect was duly
summoned and he did appear but refused to say anything in favour of the
delinquent. This conduct on the part of the Architect who was cited as a
defence witness, cannot be held to be a lacuna in the inquiry proceeding nor
can it be held to be an infirmity on the part of the Enquiring Officer so as
to vitiate the inquiry proceeding or the conclusion arrived thereunder.

5\. The further grievance that the findings of the Enquiring Officer are
findings on no evidence is belied by the very report of the Enquiring Officer.
The Enquiring Officer has dealt with the Articles of charge chronologically
and the relevant materials on the basis of which the ultimate conclusion is
arrived at. It is well settled that a conclusion or a finding of fact arrived
at in a disciplinary inquiry can be interfered with by the Court only when
there is no materials for the said conclusion; or that on the materials, the
conclusion cannot be that of a reasonable man. Having examined the report of
the Enquiring Officer, we are unable to accept the contention of the learned
counsel for the appellant that the findings of the Enquiring Officer cannot be
held to be findings based on no evidence.

6\. The only other contention that survives for consideration is the
allegation of bias. Though no specific allegation of bias had been made but
the contention is based upon the very reasonings of the Enquiring Officer and
the conclusion arrived at. According to the counsel for the appellant, a
reference to the order of the Enquiring Officer would indicate that the said
Officer was actuated with bias and proceeded to deal with the materials with
that bias in the mind which resulted in the ultimate conclusion of finding of
guilt of the charges leveled against the delinquent. We were taken through
paragraph 4.2 which is at page 290 volume II of the paper books that is
produced before us and before the Tribunal paragraph 4.11 which is at page 296
of the same volume had been placed. On going through the aforesaid two
paragraphs, we are unable to accept the contention that the assertions made in
those paragraphs indicate or establish any bias of the Enquiring Officer
towards the delinquent. Bias undoubtedly, would have to be established either
by evidence or on the materials on record which are relied upon by the
Enquiring Officer in coming to his conclusion as to the guilt of the
delinquent. In the case in hand, after applying our mind to the relevant
materials, we do not find any substance on the allegation of bias made by the
delinquent as against the Enquiring Officer.

7\. In the aforesaid premises, we do not find any legal infirmity with the
impugned order of the Tribunal so as to be interfered with by us. This appeal
accordingly fails and is dismissed.

