

Supreme Court of India

T.M.A.Pai Foundation & Ors vs State Of Karnataka & Ors on 31 October, 2002

Author: Kirpal

Bench: Quadri, S.S.M. (J), Pal, Ruma (J), Variava, S.N. (J), Balakrishnan,
K.G. (J) Reddi, P.V. (J), Bhan, Ashok (J) Pasayat, Arijit (J)

    
    
               CASE NO.:
    Writ Petition (civil)  317 of 1993
    
    PETITIONER:
    T.M.A.Pai Foundation & Ors.
    
    RESPONDENT:
    State of Karnataka & Ors.
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT: 31/10/2002
    
    BENCH:
    B.N.KIRPAL CJI & G.B.PATTANAIK & V.N.KHARE & S.RAJENDRA BABU & S.S.M.QUADRI
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

BHAN & ARIJIT PASAYAT & JUDGMENT W I T H Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 252 of
1979, 54-57, 2228 of 1981, 2460, 2582, 2583-84,3362, 3517, 3602, 3603, 3634,
3635, 3636, 8398, 8391, 5621, 5035, 3701, 3702,3703, 3704, 3715, 3728, 4648,
4649, 2479, 2480, 2547 and 3475 of 1982, 7610,4810, 9839 and 9683-84 of 1983,
12622-24 of 1984, 119 and 133 of 1987, 620 of 1989, 133 of 1992, 746, 327,
350, 613, 597, 536, 626, 444, 417, 523, 474, 485, 484,355, 525, 469, 392, 629,
399, 531, 603, 702, 628, 663, 284, 555, 343, 596, 407, 737,738, 747, 479, 610,
627, 685, 706, 726, 598, 482 and 571 of 1993, 295, 764 and D. No. 1741 of
1994, 331, 446 and 447 of 1995, 364 and 435 of 1996, 456, 454, 447 and 485 of
1997, 356, 357 and 328 of 1998, 199, 294, 279, 35, 181, 373, 487 and 23 of
1999, 561 of 2000, 6 and 132 of 2002, Civil Appeal Nos. 1236-1241 and 2392 of
1977, 687 of 1976, 3179, 3180, 3181, 3182, 1521-56, 3042-91 of 1979, 2929-31,
1464 of 1980, 2271 and 2443-46 of 1981, 4020, 290 and 10766 of 1983, 5042 and
5043 of 1989, 6147 and 5381 of 1990, 71, 72 and 73 of 1991, 1890-91, 2414 and
2625 of 1992, 4695-4746, 4754-4866 of 1993, 5543-5544 of 1994, 8098- 8100 and
11321 of 1995, 4654-4658 of 1997, 608, 3543 and 3584-3585 of 1998, 5053-5054
of 2000, 5647, 5648-5649, 5650, 5651, 5652, 5653-5654, 5655, 5656 of 2001 and
2334 of 2002, S.L.P. (C) Nos. 9950 and 9951 of 1979, 11526 and 863 of 1980,
12408 of 1985, 8844 of 1986, 12320 of 1987, 14437, 18061-62 of 1993, 904-05
and 11620 of 1994, 23421 of 1995, 4372 of 1996, 10360 and 10664 of 1997, 1216,
9779-9786, 6472-6474 and 9793 of 1998, 5101, 4480 and 4486 of 2002 T.C.
(Civil) No. 26 of 1990 and T.P. (Civil) Nos. 1013-14 of 1993.

DELIVERED BY:

B.N.KIRPAL, CJI & S.S.M.QUADRI & S.N.VARIAVA & V.N.KHARE & RUMA PAL Kirpal,
C.J.

1\. India is a land of diversity -- of different castes, peoples, communities,
languages, religions and culture. Although these people enjoy complete
political freedom, a vast part of the multitude is illiterate and lives below
the poverty line. The single most powerful tool for the upliftment and
progress of such diverse communities is eduction. The state, with its limited
resources and slow-moving machinery, is unable to fully develop the genius of
the Indian people very often t he impersonal education that is imparted by the
state, devoid of adequate material content that will make the students self-
reliant only succeeds in producing potential pen-pushers, as a result of which
sufficient jobs are not available.

2\. It is in this scenario where there is a lack of quality education and
adequate number of schools and colleges that private educational institutions
have been established by educationists, philanthropists and religious and
linguistic minorities. Their grievance is that the necessary and unproductive
load on their back in the form of governmental control, by way of rules and
regulations, has thwarted the progress of quality education. It is their
contention that the government must get off their back, and that they should
be allowed to provide quality education uninterrupted by unnecessary rules and
regulations, laid down by the bureaucracy for its own self-importance. The
private educational institutions, both aided and unaided, established by
minorities and non- minorities, in their desire to break free of the
unnecessary shackles put on their functioning as modern educational
institutions and seeking to impart quality education for the benefit of the
community for whom they were established, and others, have filed the present
writ petitions and appeals asserting their right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice unhampered by rules and regulations
that unnecessarily impinge upon their autonomy.

3\. The hearing of these cases has had a chequered history. Writ Petition No.
350 of 1993 filed by the Islamic Academy of Education and connected petitions
were placed before a Bench of 5 Judges. As the Bench was prima facie of the
opinion that Article 30 did not clothe a minority educational institution with
the power to adopt its own method of selection and the correctness of the
decision of this Court in St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi was
doubted, it was directed that the questions that arose should be
authoritatively answered by a larger Bench. These cases were then placed
before a Bench of 7 Judges. The questions framed were recast and on 6th
February, 1997, the Court directed that the matter be placed a Bench of at
least 11 Judges, as it was felt that in view of the Forty-Second Amendment to
the Constitution, whereby "education" had been included in Entry 25 of List
III of the Seventh Schedule, the question of who would be regarded as a
"minority" was required to be considered because the earlier case laws related
to the pre-amendment era, when education was only in the State List. When the
cases came up for hearing before an eleven Judge Bench, during the course of
hearing on 19th March, 1997, the following order was passed:-

"Since a doubt has arisen during the course of our arguments as to whether
this Bench would feel itself bound by the ratio propounded in -- In Re Kerala
Education Bill, 1957 (1959 SCR 955) and the Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College
Society v. State of Gujarat, , it is clarified that this sized Bench would not
feel itself inhibited by the views expressed in those cases since the present
endeavour is to discern the true scope and interpretation of Article 30(1) of
the Constitution, which being the dominant question would require examination
in its pristine purity. The factum is recorded."

4\. When the hearing of these cases commended, some questions out of the
eleven referred for consideration were reframed. We propose to give answers to
these questions after examining the rival contentions on the issues arising
therein.

5\. On behalf of all these institutions, the learned counsels have submitted
that the Constitution provides a fundamental right to establish and administer
educational institutions. With regard to non-minorities, the right was stated
to be contained in Article 19(1)(g) and/or Article 26, while in the case of
linguistic and religious minorities, the submission was that this right was
enshrined and protected by Article 30. It was further their case that private
educational institutions should have full autonomy in their administration.
While it is necessary for an educational institution to secure recognition or
affiliation, and for which purpose rules and regulations or conditions could
be prescribed pertaining to the requirement of the quality of education to be
provided, e.g., qualifications of teachers, curriculum to be taught and the
minimum facilities which should be available for the students, it was
submitted that the state should not have a right to interfere or lay down
conditions with regard to the administration of those institutions. In
particular, objection was taken to the nominations by the state on the
governing bodies of the private institutions, as well as to provisions with
regard to the manner of admitting students, the fixing of the fee structure
and recruitment of teachers through state channels.

6\. The counsels for these educational institutions, as well as the Solicitor
General of India, appearing on behalf of the Union of India, urged that the
decision of this Court in Unni Krishnan, J.P. and Ors. v. State of Andhra
Pradesh and Ors. case required reconsideration. It was submitted that the
scheme that had been framed in Unni Krishnan's case had imposed unreasonable
restrictions on the administration of the private educational institutions,
and that especially in the case of minority institutions, the right guaranteed
to them under Article 30(1) stood infringed. It was also urged that the object
that was sought to be achieved by the scheme was, in fact, not achieved.

7\. On behalf of the private minority institutions, it was submitted that on
the correct interpretation of the various provisions of the Constitution, and
Articles 29 and 30 in particular, the minority institutions have a right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The use of
the phrase "of their choice" in Article 30(1) clearly postulated that the
religious and linguistic minorities could establish and administer any type of
educational institution, whether it was a school, a degree college or a
professional college; it was argued that such an educational institution is
invariably established primarily for the benefit of the religious and
linguistic minority, and it should be open to such institutions to admit
students of their choice. While Article 30(2) was meant to ensure that these
minority institutions would not be denied aid on the ground that they were
managed by minority institutions, it was submitted that no condition which
curtailed or took away the minority character of the institution while
granting aid could be imposed. In particular, it was submitted that Article
29(2) could not be applied or so interpreted as to completely obliterate the
right of the minority institution to grant admission to the students of its
own religion or language. It was also submitted that while secular laws
relating to health, town planning, etc., would be applicable, no other rules
and regulations could be framed that would in any way curtail or interfere
with the administration of the minority educational institution. It was
emphasized by the learned counsel that the right to administer an educational
institution included the right to constitute a governing body, appoint
teachers and admit students. It was further submitted that these were the
essential ingredients of the administration of an educational institution, and
no fetter could be put on the exercise of the right to administer. It was
conceded that for the purpose of seeking recognition, qualifications of
teachers could be stipulated, as also the qualification of the students who
could be admitted; at the same time, it was argued that the manner and mode of
appointment of teachers and selection of students had to be within the
exclusive domain of the autochthonal institution.

8\. On behalf of the private non-minority unaided educational institutions, it
was contended that since secularism and equality were part of the basic
structure of the Constitution the provisions of the Constitution should be
interpreted so that the right of the private non-minority unaided institutions
were the same as that of the minority institutions. It was submitted that
while reasonable restrictions could be imposed under Article 19(6), such
private institutions should have the same freedom of administration of an
unaided institution as was sought by the minority unaided institutions.

9\. The learned Solicitor General did not dispute the contention that the
right in establish an institution had been confined on the non-minorities by
Articles 19 and 26 and on the religious and linguistic minorities by Article
30. He agreed with the submission of the counsels for the appellants that the
Unni Krishnan decision required reconsideration, and that the private unaided
educational institutions were entitled to greater autonomy. He, however,
contended that Article 29(2) was applicable to minority institutions, and the
claim of the minority institutions that they could preferably admit students
of their own religion or language to the exclusion of the other communities
was impermissible. In other words, he submitted that Article 29(2) made it
obligatory even on the minority institutions not to deny admission on the
ground of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

10\. Several States have totally disagreed with the arguments advanced by the
learned Solicitor General with regard to the applicability of Article 29(2)
and 30(1). The States of Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh and Rajasthan have
submitted that the words "their choice" in Article 30(1) enabled the minority
institutions to admit members of the minority community, and that the
inability of the minority institutions to admit others as a result of the
exercise of "their choice" would not amount to a denial as contemplated under
Article 29(2). The State of Andhra Pradesh has not expressly referred to the
inter-play between Article 29(2) and Article 30(1), but has stated that "as
the minority educational institutions are intended to benefit the minorities,
a restriction that at least 50 per cent of the students admitted should come
from the particular minority, which has established the institution should be
stipulated as a working rule", and that an institution which fulfilled the
following conditions should be regarded as minority educational institutions:

1\. All the office bearers, members of the executive committee of the society
must necessarily belong to the concerned religious/linguistic minority without
exception.

2\. The institution should admit only the concerned minority candidates to the
extent of sanctioned intake permitted to be filed by the respective
managements.

and that the Court "ought to permit the State to regulate the intake in
minority educational institutions with due regard to the need of the community
in the area which the institution is intended to serve. In no case should such
intake exceed 50% of the total admissions every year."

11\. The State of Kerala has submitted, again without express reference to
Article 29(2), "that the constitutional right of the minorities should be
extended to professional education also, but while limiting the right of the
minorities to admit students belonging to their community to 50% of the total
intake of each minority institution".

12\. The State of Karnataka has submitted that "aid is not a matter of right
but receipt thereof does not in any way dilute the minority character of the
institution. Aid can be distributed on non-discriminatory conditions but in so
far as minority institutions are concerned, their core rights will have to be
protected.

13\. On the other hand, the States of Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Maharashtra, West
Bengal, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have submitted that Article 30(1) is subject
to Article 29(2), arguing that a minority institution availing of state aid
loses the right to admit members of its community on the basis of the need of
the community.

14\. The Attorney General, pursuant to the request made by the court, made
submissions on the constitutional issues in a fair and objective manner. We
recorded our appreciation for the assistance rendered by him and the other
learned counsel.

15\. We may observe here that the counsels were informed that it was not
necessary for this Bench to decide four of the questions framed relating to
the issue of who could be regarded as religious minorities; no arguments were
addressed in respect thereto.

16\. From the arguments aforesaid, five main issues arise for consideration in
these cases, which would encompass all the eleven questions framed that are
required to be answered.

17\. We will first consider the arguments of the learned counsels under these
heads before dealing with the questions now remaining to be answered.

1\. IS THERE A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO SET UP EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION AND IF SO,
UNDER WHICH PROVISION?

18\. With regard to the establishment of educational institutions, three
Articles of the Constitution come into play. Article 19(1)(g) gives the right
to all the citizens to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation,
trade or business; this right is subject to restrictions that may be placed
under Article 19(6). Article 26 gives the right to every religious
denomination to establish and maintain an institution for religious purposes,
which would include an educational institution. Article 19(1)(g) and Article
26, therefore, confer rights on all citizens and religious denominations to
establish and maintain educational institutions. There was no serious dispute
that the majority community as well as linguistic and religious minorities
would have a right under Article 19(1)

(g) and 26 to establish educational institutions. In addition, Article 30(1),
in no uncertain terms, gives the right to the religious and linguistic
minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice.

19\. We will first consider the right to establish and administer an
educational institution under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and deal
with the right to establish educational institutions under Article 26 and 30
in the next part of the judgment while considering the rights of the
minorities.

20\. Article 19(1)(g) employs four expressions, viz., profession, occupation,
trade and business. Their fields may overlap, but each of them does have a
content of its own. Education is per se regarded as an activity that is
charitable in nature [See The State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala,.
Education has so far not been regarded as a trade or business where profit is
the motive. Even if there is any doubt about whether education is a profession
or not, it does appear that education will fall within the meaning of the
expression "occupation". Article 19(1)

(g) uses the four expressions so as to cover all activities of a citizen in
respect of which income or profit is generated, and which can consequently be
regulated under Article 19(6). In Webster's Third New International Dictionary
at page 1650, "occupation" is, inter alia , defined as "an activity in which
one engages" or "a craft, trade, profession or other means of earning a
living".

21\. In Corpus Juris Secundum, Volume LXVII, the word "occupation" is defined
as under:-

"The word "occupation" also is employed as referring to that which occupies
time and attention; a calling; or a trade; and it is only as employed in this
sense that the word is discussed in the following paragraphs. There is nothing
ambiguous about the word "occupation" as it is used in the sense of employing
one's time. It is a relative term, in common use with a well-understand
meaning, and very broad in its scope and significance. It is described as a
generic and very comprehensive term, which includes every species of the
genus, and compasses the incidental, as well as the main, requirements of
one's vocation., calling, or business. The word "occupation" is variously
defined as meaning the principal business of one's life; the principal or
usual business in which a man engages; that which principally takes up one's
time, thought, and energies; that which occupies or engages the time and
attention; that particular business, profession, trade, or calling which
engages the time and efforts of an individual; the employment in which one
engages, or the vocation of one's life; the state of being occupied or
employed in any way; that activity in which a person, natural or artificial,
is engaged with the element of a degree of permanency attached."

22\. A Five Judge Bench in Sodan Singh and Ors. v. New Delhi Municipal
Committee and Ors. at page 174, para 28, observed as follows: ".....The word
occupation has a wide meaning such as any regular work, profession, job,
principal activity, employment, business or a calling in which an individual
is engaged.....The object of using four analogous and overlapping words in
Article 19(1)(g) is to make the guaranteed right as comprehensive as possible
to include all the avenues and modes through which a man may earn his
livelihood. In a nutshell the guarantee takes into its fold any activity
carried on by a citizen of India to earn his living.....".

23\. In Unni Krishnan's case, at page 687, para 63, while referring to
education, it was observed as follows:-

".....It may perhaps fall under the category of occupation provided no
recognition is sought from the State or affiliation from the University is
asked on the basis that its a fundamental right....."

24\. While the conclusion that "occupation" comprehends the establishment of
educational institutions is correct, the proviso in the aforesaid observation
to the effect that this is so provided no recognition is sought from the state
or affiliation from the concerned university is, with the utmost respect,
erroneous. The fundamental right to establish an educational institution
cannot be confused with the right to ask for recognition of affiliation. The
exercise of a fundamental right may be controlled in a variety of ways. For
example, the right to carry on a business does not entail the right to carry
on a business at a particular place. The right to carry on a business may be
subject to licensing laws so that a denial of the licence presents a person
from carrying on that particular business. The question of whether there is a
fundamental right or not cannot be dependent upon whether it can be made the
subject matter of controls.

25\. The establishment and running of an educational institution where a large
number of persons are employed as teachers or administrative staff, and an
activity is carried on that results in the imparting of knowledge to the
students, must necessarily be regarded as an occupation, even if there is no
element of profit generation. It is difficult to comprehended that education,
per se, will not fall under any of the four expressions in Article 19(1)(g).
"Occupation" would be an activity of a person undertaken as a means of
livelihood or a mission in life. The above quoted observations in Sodan
Singh's case correctly interpret the expression "occupation" in Article
19(1)(g).

26\. The right to establish and maintain educational institutions may also be
sourced to Article 26(a), which grants, in positive terms, the right to every
religious denomination or any section thereof to establish and maintain
institutions for religious and charitable purposes, subject to public order,
morality and health. Education is a recognized head of charity. Therefore,
religious denominations or sections thereof, which do not fall within the
special categories carved out in Article 29(1) and 30(1), have the right to
establish and maintain religious and educational institutions. This would
allow members belonging to any religious denomination, including the majority
religious community, to set up an educational institution. Given this, the
phrase "private educational institution" as used in this judgment would
include not only those educational institutions set up by the secular persons
or bodies, but also educational institutions set up by religious
denominations; the word "private" is used in contradistinction to government
institutions.

2\. DOES UNNI KRISHNAN'S CASE REQUIRE RECONSIDERATION?

27\. In the case of Mohini Jain (Miss) v. State of Karnataka and Ors., the
challenge was to a notification of June 1989, which provided for a fee
structure, whereby for government seats, the tuition fee was Rs. 2, 000 per
annum, and for students from Karnataka, the fee was Rs. 25,000 per annum,
while the fee for Indian students from outside Karnataka, under the payment
category, was Rs. 60,000 per annum. It had been contended that charging such a
discriminatory and high fee violated constitutional guarantees and rights.
This attack was sustained, and it was held that there was a fundamental right
to education in every citizen, and that the state was duty bound to provide
the education, and that the private institutions that discharge the state's
duties were equally bound not to charge a higher fee than the government
institutions. The Court then held that any prescription of fee in excess of
what was payable in government colleges was a capitation fee and would,
therefore, be illegal. The correctness of this decision was challenged in Unni
Krishnan's case, where it was contended that if Mohini Jain's ratio was
applied the educational institutions would have to be closed down, as they
would be wholly unviable without appropriate funds, by way of tuition fees,
from their students.

28\. We will now examine the decision in Unni Krishnan's case. In this case,
this Court considered the conditions and regulations, if any, which the state
could impose in the running of private unaided/aided recognized or affiliated
educational institutions conducting professional courses such a medicine,
engineering, etc. The extent to which the fee could be charged by such an
institution, and the manner in which admissions could be granted was also
considered. This Court held that private unaided recognized/affiliated
educational institutions running professional courses were entitled to charge
a fee higher than that charged by government institutions for similar courses,
but that such a fee could not exceed the maximum limit fixed by the state. It
held that commercialization of eduction was not permissible, and "was opposed
to public policy and Indian tradition and therefore charging capitation fee
was illegal." With regard to private aided recognized/affiliated educational
institutions, the Court upheld the power of the government to frame rules and
regulations in matter of admission and fees, as well as in matters such a
recruitment and conditions of service of teachers and staff. Though a question
was raised as to whether the setting up of an educational institution could be
regarded as a business, profession or vocation under Article 19(1)(g), this
question was not answered. Jeevan Reddy, J., however, at page 751, para 197,
observed as follows:-

".....While we do not wish to express any opinion on the question whether the
right to establish an educational institution can be said to be carrying on
any "occupation" within the meaning of Article 19(1)(g), - perhaps, it is --
we are certainly of the opinion that such activity can neither be a trade or
business nor can it be a profession within the meaning of Article 19(1)(g).
Trade or business normally connotes an activity carried on with a profit
motive. Education has never been commerce in this country....."

29\. Reliance was placed on a decision of this Court in Bangalore Water Supply
and Sewerage Board v. A. Rajappa and Ors., wherein it had been held that
educational institutions would come within the expression "industry" in the
Industrial Disputes Act, and that, therefore, education would come under
Article 19(1)(g). But the applicability of this decision was distinguished by
Jeevan Reddy, J., observing that "we do not think the said observation (that
education as industry) in a different context has any application here". While
holding, on an interpretation of Articles 21, 41, 45 and 46, that a citizen
who had not completed the age of 14 years had a right to free education, it
was held that such a right was not available to citizens who were beyond the
age of 14 years. It was further held that private educational institutions
merely supplemented the effort of the state in educating the people. No
private educational institution could survive or subsist without recognition
and/or affiliation granted by bodies that were the authorities of the state.
In such a situation, the Court held that it was obligatory upon the authority
granting recognition/affiliation to insist upon such conditions as were
appropriate to ensure not only an education of requisite standard, but also
fairness and equal treatment in matter of admission of students. The Court
then formulated a scheme and directed every authority granting
recognition/affiliation to impose that scheme upon institutions seeking
recognition/affiliation, even if they were unaided institutions. The scheme
that was framed, inter alia, postulated

(a) that a professional college should be established and/or administered only
by a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or the
corresponding Act of a State, or by a Public Trust registered under the Trusts
Act, or under the Wakfs Act, and that no individual, firm, company or other
body of individuals would be permitted to establish and/or administer a
professional college (b) that 50% of the seats in every professional college
should be filed by the nominees of the Government or University, selected on
the basis of merit determined by a common entrance examination, which will be
referred to as "free seats"; the remaining 50% seats ("payment seats") should
be filled by those candidates who pay the fee prescribed therefore, and the
allotment of students against payment seats should be done on the basis of
inter se merit determined on the same basis as in the case of free seats (c)
that there should be no quota reserved for the management or for any family,
caste or community, which may have established such a college (d) that it
should be open to the professional college to provide for reservation of sets
for constitutionally permissible classes with the approval of the affiliating
university (e) that the fee chargeable in each professional college should be
subject to such a ceiling as may be prescribed by the appropriate authority or
by a competent court (f) that every state government should constitute a
committee to fix the ceiling on the fees chargeable by a professional college
or class of professional colleges, as the case may be. This committee should,
after hearing the professional colleges, fix the fee once every three years or
at such longer intervals, as it may think appropriate(g) that it would be
appropriate for the University Grants Commission to frame regulators under its
Act regulating the fees that the affiliated colleges operating on a no grant-
in-aid basis were entitled to charge. The AICTE, the Indian Medical Council
and the Central Government were also given similar advice. The manner in which
the seats to be filled on the basis of the common entrance test was also
indicated.

30\. The counsel for the minority institutions, as well as the Solicitor
General, have contended that the scheme framed by this Court in Unni
Krishnan's case was not warranted. It was represented to us that the cost
incurred on educating a student in an unaided professional college was more
than the total fee, which is realized on the basis of the formula fixed in the
scheme. This had resulted in revenue shortfalls. This Court, by interim orders
subsequent to the decision in Unni Krishnan's case, had permitted, within the
payment seats, some percentage of seats to be allotted to Non- Resident
Indians, against payment of a higher amount as determined by the authorities.
Even thereafter, sufficient funds were not available for the development of
those educational institutions. Another infirmity which was pointed out was
that experience has shown that most of the "free seats" were generally
occupied by students from affluent families, while students from less affluent
families were required to pay much more to secure admission to "payment
seats". This was for the reason that students from affluent families had had
better school education and the benefit of professional coaching facilities
and were, therefore, able to secure higher merit positions in the common
entrance test, and thereby secured the free seats. The education of these more
affluent students was in a way being cross-subsidized by the financially
poorer students who because of their lower position in the merit list, could
secure only "payment seats". It was also submitted by the counsel for the
minority institutions that Unni Krishnan's case was not applicable to the
minority institutions, but that notwithstanding this, the scheme to evolved
had been made applicable to them as well.

31\. Counsel for the institutions, as well as the Solicitor General, submitted
that the decision in Unni Krishnan's case, insofar as it had framed the scheme
relating to the grant of admission and the fixing of the fee, was unreasonable
and invalid. However, its conclusion that children below the age of 14 had a
fundamental right to free education did not call for any interference.

32\. It has been submitted by the learned counsel for the parties that the
implementation of the scheme by the States, which have amended their rules and
regulations, has shown a number of anomalies. As already noticed, 50% of the
seats are to be given on the basis of merit determined after the conduct of a
common entrance test, the rate of fee being minimal. The "payment seats" which
represent the balance number, therefore, cross- subsidize the "free seats".
The experience of the educational institutions has been that students who come
from private schools, and who belong to more affluent families, are able to
secure higher positions in the merit list of the common entrance test, and are
thus able to seek admission to the "free seats". Paradoxically, it is the
students who come from less affluent families, who are normally able to
secure, on the basis of the merit list prepared after the common entrance
test, only "payment seats".

33\. It was contended by petitioned counsel that the implementation of the
Unni Krishnan scheme has in fact (1) helped the privileged from richer urban
families, even after they ceased to be comparatively meritorious, and (2)
resulted in economic losses for the educational institutions concerned, and
made them financially unviable. Data in support of this contention was placed
on record in an effort to persuade this Court to hold that the scheme had
failed to achieve its object.

34\. Material has also been placed on the record in an effort to show that the
total fee realized from the fee fixed for "free seats" and the "payment seats"
is actually less than the amount of expense that is incurred on each student
admitted to the professional college. It is because there was a revenue
shortfall that this Court had permitted in NRI quota to be carved out of the
50% payment seats for which charging higher fee was permitted. Directions were
given to UGC, AICTE, Medical Council of India and Central and State
governments to regulate or fix a ceiling on fees, and to enforce the same by
imposing conditions of affiliation/permission to establish and run the
institutions.

35\. It appears to us that the scheme framed by this Court and thereafter
followed by the governments was one that cannot be called a reasonable
restriction under Article 19(6) of the Constitution. Normally, the reason for
establishing an educational institution is to impart education. The
institution thus needs qualified and experienced teachers and proper
facilities and equipment, all of which require capital investment. The
teachers are required to be paid properly. As pointed out above, the
restrictions imposed by the scheme, in Unni Krishnan's case, made it
difficult, if not impossible, for the educational institutions to run
efficiently. Thus, such restrictions cannot be said to be reasonable
restrictions.

36\. The private unaided educational institutions impart education, and that
cannot be the reason to take away their choice in matters, inter alia, of
selection of students and fixation of fees. Affiliation and recognition has to
be available to every institution that fulfills the conditions for grant of
such affiliation and recognition. The private institutions are right in
submitting that it is not open to the Court to insist that statutory
authorities should impose the terms of the scheme as a condition for grant of
affiliation or recognition; this completely destroys the institutional
autonomy and the very objective of establishment of the institution.

37\. The Unni Krishnan judgment has created certain problems, and raised
thorny issues. In its anxiety to check the commercialization of education, a
scheme of "free" and "payment" seats was evolved on the assumption that the
economic capacity of first 50% of admitted students would be greater than the
remaining 50%, whereas the converse has proved to be the reality. In this
scheme, the "payment seat" student would not only pay for his own seat, but
also finance the cost of a "free seat" classmate. When one considers the
Constitution Bench's earlier statement that higher education is not a
fundamental right, it seems unreasonable to compel a citizen to pay for the
education of another, more so in the unrealistic world of competitive
examinations which assess the merit for the purpose of admission solely on the
basis of the marks obtained, where the urban students always have an edge over
the rural students. In practice, it has been the case of the marginally less
merited rural or poor student bearing the burden of a rich and well-exposed
urban student.

38\. The scheme in Unni Krishnan's case has the effect of nationalizing
education in respect of important features, viz., the right of a private
unaided institution to give admission and to fix the fee. By framing this
scheme, which has led to the State Governments legislating in conformity with
the scheme the private institutions are undistinguishable from the government
institutions; curtailing all the essential features of the right of
administration of a private unaided educational institution can neither be
called fair or reasonable. Even in the decision in Unni Krishnan's case, it
has been observed by Jeevan Reddy, J., at page 749, para 194, as follows:

"The hard reality that emerges is that private educational institutions are a
necessity in the present day context. It is not possible to do without them
because the Governments are in no position to meet the demand - particularly
in the sector of medical and technical education which call for substantial
outlays. While education is one of the most important functions of the Indian
State it has no monopoly therein. Private educational institutions - including
minority educational institutions - too have a role to play."

39\. That private educational instructions are a necessity becomes evident
from the fact that the number of government-maintained professional colleges
has more or less remained stationary, while more private institutions have
been established. For example, in the State of Karnataka there are 19 medical
colleges out of which there are only 4 government- maintained medical
colleges. Similarly, out of 14 Dental Colleges in Karnataka, only one has been
established by the government, while in the same State, out of 51 Engineering
Colleges, only 12 have been established by the government. The aforesaid
figures clearly indicate the important role played by private unaided
educational institutions, both minority and non-minority, which cater to the
needs of students seeking professional education.

40\. Any system of student selection would be unreasonable if it deprives the
private unaided institution of the right of rational selection, which it
devised for itself, subject to the minimum qualification that may be
prescribed and to some system of computing the equivalence between different
kinds of qualifications, like a common entrance test. Such a system of
selection can involve both written and oral tests for selection, based on
principle of fairness.

41\. Surrendering the total process of selection to the state is unreasonable,
as was sought to be done in the Unni Krishnan scheme. Apart from the decision
in St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, which recognized and upheld
the right of a minority aided institution to have a rational admission
procedure of its own, earlier Constitution Bench decision of this Court have,
in effect, upheld such a right of an institution devising a rational manner of
selecting and admitting students.

42\. In R. Chitralekha and Anr. v. State of Mysore and Ors., while considering
the validity of a viva-voce test for admission to a government medical
college, it was observed at page 380 that colleges run by the government,
having regard to financial commitments and other relevant considerations,
would only admit a specific number of students. It had devised a method for
screening the applicants for admission. While upholding the order so issued,
it was observed that "once it is conceded, and it is not disputed before us,
that the State Government can run medical and engineering colleges, it cannot
be denied the power to admit such qualified students as pass the reasonable
tests laid down by it. This is a power which every private owner of a College
will have, and the Government which runs its own Colleges cannot be denied
that power." (emphasis added).

43\. Again, in Minor P. Rajendran v. State of Madras and Ors., it was observed
at page 795 that "so far as admission is concerned, it has to be made by those
who are in control of the Colleges, and in this case the Government, because
the medical colleges are Government colleges affiliated to the University. In
these circumstances, the Government was entitled to frame rules for admission
to medical colleges controlled by it subject to the rules of the university as
to eligibility and qualifications." The aforesaid observations clearly
underscore the right of the colleges to frame rules for admission and to admit
students. The only requirement or control is that the rules for admission must
be subject to the rules of the university as to eligibility and
qualifications. The Court did not say that the university could provide the
manner in which the students were to be selected.

44\. In Kumari Chitra Ghosh and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors., dealing with
a government run medical college at pages 232-33, para 9, it was observed as
follows:

"It is the Central Government which bears the financial burden of running the
medical college. It is for it to lay down the criteria for eligibility....."

45\. In view of the discussion hereinabove, we hold that the decision in Unni
Krishnan's case, insofar as it framed the scheme relating to the grant of
admission and the fixing of the fee, was not correct, and to that extent, the
said decision and the consequent direction given to UGC, AICTE, Medical
Council of India, Central and State Government, etc., are overruled.

3\. IN CASE OF PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS, CAN THERE BE GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS AND,
IF SO, TO WHAT EXTENT?

46\. We will now examine the nature and extent of the regulations that can be
framed by the State, University or any affiliating body, while granting
recognition or affiliation to a private educational institution.

47\. Private educational institutions, both aided and unaided, are established
and administered by religious and linguistic minorities, as well as by non-
minorities. Such private educational institutions provide education at three
levels, viz., school, college and professional level. It is appropriate to
first deal with the case of private unaided institutions and private aided
institutions that are not administered by linguistic or religious minorities.
Regulations that can be framed relating to minority institutions will be
considered while examining the merit and effect of Article 30 of the
Constitution.

Private Unaided Non-Minority Educational Institutions

48\. Private education is one of the most dynamic and fastest growing segments
of post-secondary education at the turn of the twenty-first century. A
combination of unprecedented demand for access to higher education and the
inability or unwillingness of government to provide the necessary support has
brought private higher education to the forefront. Private institutions, with
a long history in many countries, are expanding in scope and number, and are
becoming increasingly important in parts of the world that relied almost
entirely on the public sector.

49\. Not only has demand overwhelmed the ability of the governments to provide
education, there has also been a significant change in the way that higher
education is perceived. The idea of an academic degree as a "private good"
that benefits the individual rather than a "public good" for society is now
widely accepted. The logic of today's economics and an ideology of
privatization have contributed to the resurgence of private higher education,
and the establishing of private institutions where none or very few existed
before.

50\. The right to establish and administer broadly comprises of the following
rights:-

(a) to admit students:

(b) to set up a reasonable fee structure:

(c) to constitute a governing body;

(d) to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); and

(e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any
employees.

51\. A University Education Commission was appointed on 4th November, 1948,
having Dr. S. Radhakrishnan as its Chairman and nine other renowned
educationists as its members. The terms of reference, inter alia, included
matters relating to means and objects of university education and research in
India and maintenance of higher standards of teaching and examining in
universities and colleges under their control. In the report submitted by this
Commission, in paras 29 and 31, it referred to autonomy in education which
reads as follows:-

"University Autonomy. -- Freedom of individual development is the basis of
democracy. Exclusive control of education by the State has been an important
factor in facilitating the maintenance of totalitarian tyrannies. In such
States institutions of higher learning controlled and managed by governmental
agencies act like mercenaries, promote the political purposes of the State,
make them acceptable to an increasing number of their populations and supply
then with the weapons they need. We must resist, in the interests of our own
democracy, the trend towards the governmental domination of the educational
process.

Higher educational is, undoubtedly, an obligation of the State but State aid
is not to be confused with State control over academic policies and practices.
Intellectual progress demands the maintenance of the spirit of free inquiry.
The pursuit and practice of truth regardless of consequences has been the
ambition of universities. Their prayer is that of the dying Goethe: "More
light," or that Ajax in the mist "Light, though I perish in the light.

xxxxx xxx xxx The respect in which the universities of Great Britain are held
is due to the freedom from governmental interference which they enjoy
constitutionally and actually. Our universities should be released from the
control of politics.

Liberal Education. -- All education is expected to be liberal. It should free
us from the shackles of ignorance, prejudice and unfounded belief. If we are
incapable of achieving the good life, it is due to faults in our inward being,
to the darkness in us. The process of education is the slow conquering of this
darkness. To lead us from darkness to light, to free us from every kind of
domination except that of reason, is the aim of education."

52\. There cannot be a better exposition than what has been observed by these
renowned educationists with regard to autonomy in education. The aforesaid
passage clearly shows that the governmental domination of the educational
process must be resisted. Another pithy observation of the Commission was that
state aid was not to be confused with state control over academic policies and
practices. The observations referred to hereinabove clearly contemplate
educational institutions soaring to great heights in pursuit of intellectual
excellence and being free from unnecessary governmental controls.

53\. With regard to the core components of the rights under Article 19 and
26(a), it must be held that while the state has the right to prescribe
qualifications necessary for admission, private unaided colleges have the
right to admit students of their choice, subject to an objective and rational
procedure of selection and the compliance of conditions, if any, requiring
admission of a small percentage of students belonging to weaker sections of
the society by granting them freeships or scholarships, if not granted by the
Government. Furthermore, in setting up a reasonable fee structure, the element
of profiteering is not as yet accepted in Indian conditions. The fee structure
must take into consideration the need to generate funds to be utilized for the
betterment and growth of the educational institution, the betterment of
education in that institution and to provide facilities necessary for the
benefit of the students. In any event, a private institution will have the
right to constitute its own governing body, for which qualifications may be
prescribed by the state or the concerned university. It will, however, be
objectionable if the state retains the power to nominate specific individuals
on governing bodies. Nomination by the state, which could be on a political
basis, will be an inhibiting factor for private enterprise to embark upon the
occupation of establishing and administering educational institutions. For the
same reasons, nomination of teachers either directly by the department or
through a service commission will be an unreasonable inroad and an
unreasonable restrictions on the attorney of the private unaided educational
institution.

54\. The right to establish an educational institution can be regulated; but
such regulatory measures must, in general, be to ensure the maintenance of
proper academic standards, atmosphere and infrastructure (including qualified
staff) and the prevention of mal-administration by those in charge of
management. The fixing of a rigid fee structure, dictating the formation and
composition of a government body, compulsory nomination of teachers and staff
for appointment or nominating students for admissions would be unacceptable
restrictions.

55\. The Constitution recognizes the right of the individual or religious
denomination, or a religious or linguistic minority to establish an
educational institution. If aid or financial assistance is not sought, then
such institution will be a private unaided institution. Although, in Unni
Krishnan's case, the Court emphasized the important role played by private
unaided institutions and the need for private funding, in the scheme that was
framed, restrictions were placed on some of the important ingredients relating
to the functioning of an educational institution. There can be no doubt that
in seeking affiliation or recognition, the Board or the university or the
affiliating or recognizing authority can lay down conditions consistent with
the requirement to ensure the excellence of education. It can, for instance,
indicate the quality of the teachers by prescribing the minimum qualifications
that they must possess, and the courses of study and curricula. It can, for
the same reasons, also stipulate the existence of infrastructure sufficient
for its growth, as a pre-requisite. But the essence of a private educational
institution is the autonomy that the institution must have in its management
and administration. There, necessarily, has to be a difference in the
administration of private unaided institutions and the government-aided
institutions. Whereas in the latter case, the Government will have greater say
in the administration, including admissions and fixing of fees, in the case of
private unaided institutions, maximum autonomy in the day-to-day
administration has to be with the private unaided institutions. Bureaucratic
or governmental interference in the administration of such an institution will
undermine its independence. While an educational institution is not a
business, in order to examine the degree of independence that can be given to
a recognized educational institution, like any private entity that does not
seek aid or assistance from the Government, and that exists by virtue of the
funds generated by it, including its loans or borrowings, it is important to
note that the essential ingredients of the management of the private
institution include the recruiting students and staff, and the quantum of fee
that is to be charged.

56\. An educational institution is established for the purpose of imparting
education of the type made available by the institution. Different courses of
study are usually taught by teachers who have to be recruited as per
qualifications that may be prescribed. It is no secret that better working
conditions will attract better teachers. More amenities will ensure that
better students seek admission to that institution. One cannot lose sight of
the fact that providing good amenities to the students in the form of
competent teaching faculty and other infrastructure costs money. It has,
therefore, to be left to the institution, if it chooses not to seek any aid
from the government, to determine the scale of fee that it can charge from the
students. One also cannot lose sight of the fact that we live in a competitive
world today, where professional education is in demand. We have been given to
understand that a large number of professional and other institutions have
been started by private parties who do not seek any governmental aid. In a
sense a prospective students has various options open to him/her where,
therefore, normally economic forces have a role to play. The decision on the
fee to be charged must necessarily be left to the private educational
institution that does not seek or is not dependent upon any funds from the
government.

57\. We, however, wish to emphasize one point, and that is that inasmuch as
the occupation of education is, in a sense, regarded as charitable, the
government can provide regulations that will ensure excellence in education,
while forbidding the charging of capitation fee and profiteering by the
institution. Since the object of setting up an educational institution is by
definition "charitable", it is clear that an educational institution cannot
charge such a fee as is not required for the purpose of fulfilling that
object. To put it differently, in the establishment of an educational
institution, the object should not be to make a profit, inasmuch as education
is essentially charitable in nature. There can, however, be a reasonable
revenue surplus, which may be generated by the educational institution for the
purpose of development of education and expansion of the institution.

58\. For admission into any professional institution, merit must play an
important role. While it may not be normally possible to judge the merit of
the applicant who seeks admission into a school, while seeking admission to a
professional institution and to become a competent professional, it is
necessary that meritorious candidates are not unfairly treated or put at a
disadvantage by preferences shown to less meritorious but more influential
applicants. Excellence in professional education would require that greater
emphasis be laid on the merit of a student seeking admission. Appropriate
regulations for this purpose may be made keeping in view the other
observations made in this judgment in the context of admissions to unaided
institutions.

59\. Merit is usually determined, for admission to professional and higher
education colleges, by either the marks that the student obtains at the
qualifying examination or school leaving certificate stage followed by the
interview, or by a common entrance test conducted by the institution, or in
the case of professional colleges, by government agencies.

60\. Education is taught at different levels from primary to professional. It
is, therefore, obvious that government regulations for all levels or types of
educational institutions cannot be identical; so also, the extent of control
or regulation could be greater vis-a-vis aided institutions.

61\. In the case of unaided private schools, maximum autonomy has to be with
the management with regard to administration, including the right of
appointment, disciplinary powers, admission of students and the fees to be
charged. At the school level, it is not possible to grant admission on the
basis of merit. It is no secret that the examination results at all levels of
unaided private schools, notwithstanding the stringent regulations of the
governmental authorities, are far superior to the results of the government-
maintained schools. There is no compulsion on students to attend private
schools. The rush for admission is occasioned by the standards maintained in
such schools, and recognition of the fact that state-run schools do not
provide the same standards of education. The State says that it has no funds
to establish institutions at the same level of excellence as private schools.
But by curtaining the income of such private schools, it disables those
schools from affording the best facilities because of a lack of funds. If this
lowering of standards from excellence to a level of mediocrity is to be
avoided, the state has to provide the difference which, therefore, brings us
back in a vicious circle to the original problem, viz., the lack of state
funds. The solution would appear to lie in the States not using their scanty
resources to prop up institutions that are able to otherwise maintain
themselves out of the fees charged, but in improving the facilities and
infrastructure of state-run schools and in subsidizing the fees payable by the
students there. It is in the interest of the general public that more good
quality schools are established; autonomy and non-regulation of the school
administration in the right of appointment, admission of the students and the
fee to be charged will ensure that more such institutions are established. The
fear that if a private school is allowed to charge fees commensurate with the
fees affordable, the degrees would be "purchasable" is an unfounded one since
the standards of education can be and are controllable through the regulations
relating to recognition, affiliation and common final examinations.

62\. There is a need for private enterprise in non-professional college
education as well. At present, insufficient number of undergraduate colleges
are being and have been established, one of the inhibiting factors being that
there is a lack of autonomy due to government regulations. It will not be
wrong to presume that the numbers of professional colleges are growing at a
faster rate than the number of undergraduate and non- professional colleges.
While it is desirable that there should be a sufficient number of professional
colleges, it should also be possible for private unaided undergraduate
colleges that are non-technical in nature to have maximum autonomy similar to
a school.

63\. It was submitted that for maintaining the excellence of education, it was
important that the teaching faculty and the members of the staff of any
educational institution performed their duties in the manner in which it is
required to be done, according to the rules or instructions. There have been
cases of misconduct having been committed by the teachers and other members of
the staff. The grievance of the institution is that whenever disciplinary
action is sought to be taken in relation to such misconduct, the rules that
are normally framed by the government or the university are clearly loaded
against the Management. It was submitted that in some cases, the rules require
the prior permission of the governmental authorities before the intimation of
the disciplinary proceeding, while in other cases, subsequent permission is
required before the imposition of penalties in the case of proven misconduct.
While emphasizing the need for an independent authority to adjudicate upon the
grievance of the employee or the Management in the event of some punishment
being imposed, it was submitted that there should be no role for the
government or the university to play in relation to the imposition of any
penalty on the employee.

64\. An educational institution is established only for the purpose of
imparting education to the students. In such an institution, it is necessary
for all to maintain discipline and abide by the rules and regulations that
have been lawfully framed. The teachers are like foster- parents who are
required to look after, cultivate and guide the students in their pursuit of
education. The teachers and the institution exist for the students and not
vice versa. Once this principle is kept in mind, it must follow that it
becomes imperative for the teaching and other staff of an educational
institution to perform their duties properly, and for the benefit of the
students. Where allegations of misconduct are made, it is imperative that a
disciplinary enquiry is conducted, and that a decision is taken. In the case
of a private institution, the relationship between the Management and the
employees is contractual in nature. A teacher, if the contract so provides,
can be proceeded against, and appropriate disciplinary action can be taken if
the misconduct of the teacher is proved. Considering the nature of the duties
and keeping the principle of natural justice in mind for the purposes of
establishing misconduct and taking action thereon, it is imperative that a
fair domestic enquiry is conducted. It is only on the basis of the result of
the disciplinary enquiry that the management will be entitled to take
appropriate action. We see no reason why the Management of a private unaided
educational should seek the consent or approval of any governmental authority
before taking any such action. In the ordinary relationship of master and
servant, governed by the terms of a contract of employment, anyone who is
guilty of breach of the terms can be proceeded against and appropriately
relief can be sought. Normally, the aggrieved party would approach a court of
law and seek redress. In the case of educational institutions, however, we are
of the opinion that requiring a teacher or a member of the staff to go to a
civil court for the purpose of seeking redress is not in the interest of
general education. Disputes between the management and the staff of
educational institutions must be decided speedily, and without the excessive
incurring of costs. It would, therefore, be appropriate that an educational
Tribunal be set up in each district in a State, to enable the aggrieved
teacher to file an appeal, unless there already exists such an educational
tribunal in a State -- the object being that the teacher should not suffer
through the substantial costs that arise because of the location of the
tribunal; if the tribunals are limited in number, they can hold circuit/camp
sittings in different districts to achieve this objective. Till a specialized
tribunal is set up, the right of filing the appeal would lie before the
District Judge or Additional District Judge as notified by the government. It
will not be necessary for the institution to get prior permission or ex post
facto approval of a governmental authority while taking disciplinary action
against a teacher or any other employee. The State Government shall determine,
in consultation with the High Court, the judicial forum in which an aggrieved
teacher can file an appeal against the decision of the management concerning
disciplinary action or termination of service.

65\. The reputation of an educational institution is established by the
qualify of its faculty and students, and the educational and other facilities
that the colleges has to offer. The private educational institutions have a
personality of their own, and in order to maintain their atmosphere and
traditions, it is but necessary that they must have the right to choose and
select the students who can be admitted to their courses of studies. If is for
this reason that in the St. Stephen's College case, this Court upheld the
scheme whereby a cut-off percentage was fixed for admission, after which the
students were interviewed and thereafter selected. While an educational
institution cannot grant admission on its whims and fancies, and must follow
some identifiable or reasonable methodology of admitting the students, any
scheme, rule or regulation that does not give the institution the right to
reject candidates who might otherwise be qualified according to say their
performance in an entrance test, would be an unreasonable restriction under
Article 19(6), though appropriate guidelines/modalities can be prescribed for
holding the entrance test a fair manner. Even when students are required to be
selected on the basis of merit, the ultimate decision to grant admission to
the students who have otherwise qualified for the grant of admission must be
left with the educational institution concerned. However, when the institution
rejects such students, such rejection must not be whimsical or for extraneous
reasons.

66\. In the case of private unaided educational institution, the authority
granting recognition or affiliation can certainly lay down conditions for the
grant of recognition or affiliation; these conditions must pertain broadly to
academic and educational matters and welfare of students and teachers - but
how the private unaided institutions are to run is a matter of administration
to be taken care of by the Management of those institutions.

Private Unaided Professional Colleges

67\. We now come to the regulations that can be framed relating to private
unaided professional institutions.

68\. It would be unfair to apply the same rules and regulations regulating
admission to both aided and unaided professional institutions. It must be
borne in mind that unaided professional institutions are entitled to autonomy
in their administration while, at the same time, they do not forgo or discard
the principle of merit. It would, therefore, be permissible for the university
or the government, at the time of granting recognition, to require a private
unaided institution to provide for merit-based selection while, at the same
time, giving the Management sufficient discretion in admitting students. This
can be done through various methods. For instance, a certain percentage of the
seats can be reserved for admission by the Management out of those students
who have passed the common entrance test held by itself or by the
State/University and have applied to the college concerned for admission,
while the rest of the seats may be filled up on the basis of counselling by
the state agency. This will incidentally take care of poorer and backward
sections of the society. The prescription of percentage for this purpose has
to be done by the government according to the local needs and different
percentage can be fixed for minority unaided and non-minority unaided and
professional colleges. The same principles may be applied to other non-
professional but unaided educational institutions viz., graduation and post-
graduation non-professional colleges or institutes.

69\. In such professional unaided institutions, the Management will have the
right to select teachers as per the qualifications and eligibility conditions
laid down by the State/University subject to adoption of a rational procedure
of selection. A rational fee structure should be adopted by the Management,
which would not be entitled to charge a capitation fee. Appropriate machinery
can be devised by the state or university to ensure that no capitation fee is
charged and that there is no profiteering, though a reasonable surplus for the
furtherance of education is permissible. Conditions granting recognition or
affiliation can broadly cover academic and educational matters including the
welfare of students and teachers.

70\. It is well established all over the world that those who seek
professional education must pay for it. The number of seats available in
government and government-aided colleges is very small, compared to the number
of persons seeking admission to the medical and engineering colleges. All
those eligible and deserving candidates who could not be accommodated in
government colleges would stand deprived of professional education. This void
in the field of medical and technical education has been filled by
institutions that are established in different places with the aid of
donations and the active part taken by public-minded individuals. The object
of establishing an institution has thus been to provide technical or
professional education to the deserving candidates, and is not necessarily a
commercial venture. In order that this intention is meaningful, the
institution must be recognized. At the school level, the recognition or
affiliation has to be sought from the educational authority or the body that
conducts the school-leaving examination. It is only on the basis of that
examination that a school-leaving certificate is granted, which enables a
student to seek admission in further courses of study after school. A college
or a professional educational institution has to get recognition from the
concerned university, which normally requires certain conditions to be
fulfilled before recognition. It has been held that conditions of affiliation
or recognition, which pertain to the academic and educational character of the
institution and ensure uniformity, efficiency and excellence in educational
courses are valid, and that they do not violate even the provisions of Article
30 of the Constitution; but conditions that are laid down for granting
recognition should not be such as may lead to governmental control of the
administration of the private educational institutions.

Private Aided Professional Institutions (non-minority)

71\. While giving aid to professional institutions, it would be permissible
for the authority giving aid to prescribe by rules or regulations, the
conditions on the basis of which admission will be granted to different aided
colleges by virtue of merit, coupled with the reservation policy of the state.
The merit may be determined either through a common entrance test conducted by
the University or the Government followed by counseling, or on the basis of an
entrance test conducted by individual institutions - the method to be followed
is for the university or the government to decide. The authority may also
device other means to ensure that admission is granted to an aided
professional institution on the basis of merit. In the case of such
institutions, it will be permissible for the government or the university to
provide that consideration should be shown to the weaker sections of the
society.

72\. Once aid is granted to a private professional educational institution,
the government or the state agency, as a condition of the grant of aid, can
put fetters on the freedom in the matter of administration and management of
the institution. The state, which gives aid to an educational institution, can
impose such conditions as are necessary for the proper maintenance of the high
standards of education as the financial burden is shared by the state. The
state would also be under an obligation to protect the interest of the
teaching and non-teaching staff. In many states, there are various statutory
provisions to regulate the functioning of such educational institutions where
the States give, as a grant or aid, a substantial proportion of the revenue
expenditure including salary, pay and allowances of teaching and non-teaching
staff. It would be its responsibility to ensure that the teachers working in
those institutions are governed by proper service conditions. The state, in
the case of such aided institutions, has ample power to regulate the method of
selection and appointment of teachers after prescribing requisite
qualifications for the same. Ever since In Re The Kerala Education Bill, 1957
[(1959) SCR 995], this Court has upheld, in the case of aided institutions,
those regulations that served the interests of students and teachers. Checks
on the administration may be necessary in order to ensure that the
administration is efficient and sound and will serve the academic needs of the
institutions. In other words, rules and regulations that promote good
administration and prevent mal-administration can be formulated so as to
promote the efficiency of teachers, discipline and fairness in administration
and to preserve harmony among affiliated institutions. At the same time it has
to be ensured that even an aided institution does not become a government-
owned and controlled institution. Normally, the aid that is granted is
relatable to the pay and allowances of the teaching staff. In addition, the
Management of the private aided institutions has to incur revenue and capital
expenses. Such aided institutions cannot obtain that extent of autonomy in
relation to management and administration as would be available to a private
unaided institution, but at the same time, it cannot also be treated as an
educational institution departmentally run by government or as a wholly owned
and controlled government institution and interfere with Constitution of the
governing bodies or thrusting the staff without reference to Management.

Other Aided Institutions

73\. There are a large number of educational institutions, like schools and
non-professional colleges, which cannot operate without the support of aid
from the state. Although these institutions may have been established by
philanthropists or other public-spirited persons, it becomes necessary, in
order to provide inexpensive education to the students, to seek aid from the
state. In such cases, as those of the professional aided institutions referred
to hereinabove, the Government would be entitled to make regulations relating
to the terms and conditions of employment of the teaching and non-teaching
staff whenever the aid for the posts is given by the State as well as
admission procedures. Such rules and regulations can also provide for the
reasons and the manner in which a teacher or any other member of the staff can
be removed. in other words, the autonomy of a private aided institution would
be less than that of an unaided institution.

4\. IN ORDER TO DETERMINE THE EXISTENCE OF A RELIGIOUS OR LINGUISTIC MINORITY
IN RELATION TO ARTICLE 30, WHAT IS TO BE THE UNIT - THE STATE OR THE COUNTRY
AS A WHOLE?

74\. We now consider the question of the unit for the purpose of determining
the definition of "minority" within the meaning of Article 30(1).

75\. Article 30(1) deals with religious minorities and linguistic minorities.
The opening words of Article 30(1) make it clear that religious and linguistic
minorities have been put at par, insofar as that Article is concerned.
Therefore, whatever the unit - whether a state or the whole of India - for
determining a linguistic minority, it would be the same in relation to a
religious minority. India is divided into different linguistic states. The
states have been carved out on the basis of the language of the majority of
persons of that region. For example, Andhra Pradesh was established on the
basis of the language of that region. viz., Telugu. "Linguistic minority" can,
therefore, logically only be in relation to a particular State. If the
determination of "linguistic minority" for the purpose of Article 30 is to be
in relation to the whole of India, then within the State of Andhra Pradesh,
Telugu speakers will have to be regarded as a "linguistic minority". This will
clearly be contrary to the concept of linguistic states.

76\. If, therefore, the state has to be regarded as the unit for determining
"linguistic minority" vis-a-vis Article 30, then with "religious minority"
being on the same footing, it is the state in relation to which the majority
or minority status will have to be determined.

77\. In the Kerala Education Bill case, the question as to whether the
minority community was to be determined on the basis of the entire population
of India, or on the basis of the population of the State forming a part of the
Union was posed at page 1047. It had been contended by the State of Kerala
that for claiming the status of minority, the persons must numerically be a
minority in the particular region in which the education institution was
situated, and that the locality or ward or town where the institution was to
be situated had to be taken as the unit to determine the minority community.
No final opinion on this question was expressed, but it was observed at page
1050 that as the Kerala Education Bill "extends to the whole of the State of
Kerala and consequently the minority must be determined by reference to the
entire population of that State."

78\. In two cases pertaining to the DAV College, this Court had to consider
whether the Hindus were a religious minority in the State of Punjab. In D.A.V.
College v. State of Punjab and Ors. [1971 (Supp.) SCR 688], the question posed
was as to what constituted a religious or linguistic minority, and how it was
to be determined. After examining the opinion of this Court in the Kerala
Education Bill case, the Court held that the Arya Samajis, who were Hindus,
were a religious minority in the State of Punjab, even though they may not
have been so in relation to the entire country. In another case, D.A.V.
College Bhatinda v. State of Punjab and Ors. [1971 (Supp.) SCR 677], the
observations in the first D.A.V. College case were explained, and at page 681,
it was stated that "what constitutes a linguistic or religious minority must
be judged in relation to the State inasmuch as the impugned Act was a State
Act and not in relation to the whole of India." The Supreme Court rejected the
contention that since Hindus were a majority in India, they could not be a
religious minority in the state of Punjab, as it took the state as the unit to
determine whether the Hindus were a minority community.

79\. There can, therefore, be little doubt that this Court has consistently
held that, with regard to a state law, the unit to determine a religious or
linguistic minority can only be the state.

80\. The Forty-Second Amendment to the Constitution included education in the
Concurrent List under Entry 25. Would this in any way change the position with
regard to the determination of a "religious" or "linguistic minority" for the
purposes of Article 30?

81\. As a result of the insertion of Entry 25 into List III, Parliament can
now legislate in relation to education, which was only a state subject
previously. The jurisdiction of the Parliament is to make laws for the whole
or a part of India. It is well recognized that geographical classification is
not violative of Article 14. It would, therefore, be possible that, with
respect to a particular State or group of States, Parliament may legislate in
relation to education. However, Article 30 gives the right to a linguistic or
religious minority of a State to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice. The minority for the purpose of Article 30
cannot have different meanings depending upon who is legislating. Language
being the basis for the establishment of different states for the purposes of
Article 30 a "linguistic minority" will have to be determined in relation to
the state in which the educational institution is sought to be established.
The position with regard to the religious minority is similar, since both
religious and linguistic minorities have been put at par in Article 30.

5\. TO WHAT EXTENT CAN THE RIGHTS OF AIDED PRIVATE MINORITY INSTITUTIONS TO
ADMINISTER BE REGULATED?

82\. Article 25 give to all persons the freedom of conscience and the right to
freely profess, practice and propagate religion. This right, however, is not
absolute. The opening words of Article 25(1) make this right subject to public
order, morality and health, and also to the other provisions of Part III of
the Constitution. This would mean that the right given to a person under 25(1)
can be curtailed or regulated if the exercise of that right would violate
other provisions of Part III of the Constitution, or if the exercise thereof
is to in consonance with public order, morality and health. The general law
made by the government contains provisions relating to public order, morality
and health; these would have to be complied with, and cannot be violated by
any person in exercise of his freedom of conscience or his freedom to profess,
practice and propagate religion. For example, a person cannot propagate his
religion in such a manner as to denigrate another religion or bring about
dissatisfaction amongst people.

83\. Article 25(2) gives specific power to the state to make any law
regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular
activity, which may be associated with religious practice as provided by Sub-
clause (a) of Article 25(2). This is a further curtailment of the right to
profess, practice and propagate religion conferred on the persons under
Article 25(1). Article 25(2)(a) covers only a limited area associated with
religious practice, in respect of which a law can be made. A careful reading
of Article 25(2)(a) indicates that it does not prevent the State from making
any law in relation to the religious practice as such. The limited
jurisdiction granted by Article 25(2) relates to the making of a law in
relation to economic, financial, political or other secular activities
associated with the religious practice.

84\. The freedom to manage religious affairs is provided by Article 26. This
Article gives the right to every religious denomination, or any section
thereof, to exercise the rights that it stipulates. However, this right has to
be exercised in a manner that is in conformity with public order, morality and
health. Clause (a) of Article 26 gives a religious denomination the right to
establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes.
There is no dispute that the establishment of an educational institution comes
within the meaning of the expression "charitable purpose". Therefore, while
Article 25(1) grants the freedom of conscience and the right to profess,
practice and propagate religion, Article 26 can be said to be complementary to
it, and provides for every religious denomination, or any section thereof, to
exercise the rights mentioned therein. This is because Article 26 does not
deal with the right of an individual, but is confined to a religious
denomination. Article 26 refers to a denomination of any religion, whether it
is a majority or a minority religion, just as Article 25 refers to all
persons, whether they belong to the majority or a minority religion. Article
26 gives the right to majority religious denominations, as well as to minority
religious denominations, to exercise the rights contained therein.

85\. Secularism being one of the important basic features of our Constitution,
Article 27 provides that no person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the
proceeds of which are specifically appropriated for the payment of expenses
for the promotion and maintenance of any particular religion or religions
denomination. The manner in which the Article has been framed does not
prohibit the state from enacting a law to incur expenses for the promotion or
maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination, but
specifies that by that law, no person can be compelled to pay any tax, the
proceeds of which are to be so utilized. In other words, if there is a tax for
the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious
denomination, no person an be compelled to pay any such tax.

86\. Article 28(1) prohibits any educational institution, which is wholly
maintained out of state funds, to provide for religious instruction. Moral
education dissociation from any demoninational doctrine is not prohibited;
but, as the state is intended to be secular, an educational institution wholly
maintained out of state funds cannot impart or provide for any religious
instruction.

87\. The exception to Article 28(1) is contained in Article 28(2). Article
28(2) deals with cases where, by an endowment or trust, an institution is
established, and the terms of the endowment or the trust require the imparting
of religious instruction, and where that institution is administered by the
state. In such a case, the prohibition contained in Article 28(1) does not
apply. If the administration of such an institution is voluntarily given to
the government, or the government, for a good reason and in accordance with
law, assumes or takes over the management of that institution, say on account
of mal-administration, then the government, on assuming the administration of
the institution, would be obliged to continue with the imparting of religious
instruction as provided by the endowment or the trust.

88\. While Article 28(1) and Article 28(2) relate to institutions that are
wholly maintained out of state funds, Article 28(3) deals with an educational
institution that is recognized by the state or receives aid out of state
funds. Article 28(3) gives the person attending any educational institution
the right not to take part in any religious instruction, which may be imparted
by an institution recognized by the state, or receiving aid from the state.
Such a person also has the right not to attend any religious worship that may
be conducted in such an institution, or in any premises attached thereto,
unless such a person, or if he/she is a minor, his/her guardian, has given
his/her consent. The reading of Article 28(3) clearly shows that no person
attending an educational institution can be required to take part in any
religious instruction or any religious worship, unless the person or his/her
guardian has given his/her consent thereto, in a case where the educational
institution has been recognized by the state or receives aid out of its funds.
We have seen that Article 26(a) gives the religious denomination the right to
establish an educational institution, the religious denomination being either
of the majority community or minority community. In any institution, whether
established by the majority or a minority religion, if religious instruction
in imparted, no student can be compelled to take part in the said religious
instruction or in any religious worship. An individual has the absolute right
not to be compelled to take part in any religious instruction or worship.
Article 28(3) thereby recognizes the right of an individual to practice or
profess his own religion. In other words, in matters relating to religious
instruction or worship, there can be no compulsion where the educational
institution is either recognized by the state or receives aid from the state.

89\. Articles 29 and 30 are a group of articles relating to cultural and
educational rights. Article 29(1) gives the right to any section of the
citizens residing in India or any part thereof, and having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own, to conserve the same. Article 29(1)
does not refer to any religion, even though the marginal note of the Article
mentions the interests of minorities. Article 29(1) essentially refers to
sections of citizens who have a distinct language script or culture, even
though their religion may not be the same. The common thread that runs through
Article 29(1) in language, script or culture, and not religion. For example,
if in any part of the country, there is a section of society that has a
distinct language, they are entitled to conserve the same, even though the
persons having that language may profess different religions. Article 29(1)
gives the right to all sections of citizens, whether they are in a minority or
the majority religions, to conserve their language, script or culture.

90\. In the exercise of this right to converse the language, script or
culture, that section of the society can set up educational institutions. The
right to establish and maintain institutions of its choice is a necessary
concomitant to the right conferred by Article 30. The right under Article 30
is not absolute. Article 29(2) provides that, where any educational
institution is maintained by the state or receives aid out of state funds no
citizen shall be denied admission on the grounds only of religion, race,
caste, language or any of them. The use of the expression "any educational
institution" in Article 29(2) would refer to any educational institution
established by anyone, but which is maintained by the state or receives aid
out of state funds. In other words, on a plain reading, state-maintained or
aided educational institutions, whether established by the Government or the
majority or a minority community cannot deny admission to a citizen on the
grounds only of religion, race, caste or language.

91\. The right of the minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions is provided for by Article 30(1). To some extent, Article
26(1)(a) and Article 30(1) overlap, insofar as they relate to the
establishment of educational institutions but whereas Article 26 gives the
right both to the majority as well as minority communities to establish and
maintain institutions for charitable purposes, which would inter alia, include
educational institutions, Article 30(1) refers to the right of minorities to
establish and maintain educational institutions of their choice. Another
difference between Article 26 and Article 30 is that whereas Article 26 refers
only to religious denominations, Article 30 contains the right of religious as
well as linguistic minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice.

92\. Article 30(1) bestows on the minorities, whether based on religion or
language, the right to establish and administer educational institution of
their choice. Unlike Article 25 and 26, Article 30(1) does not specifically
state that the right under Article 30(1) is subject to public order, morality
and health or to other provisions of Part III. This Sub-Article also does not
specifically mention that the right to establish and administer a minority
educational institution would be subject to any rules or regulations.

93\. Can Article 30(1) be so read as to mean that it contains an absolute
right of the minorities, whether based on religion or language, to establish
and administer educational institutions in any manner they desire, and without
being obliged to comply with the provisions of any law? Des Article 30(1) give
the religious or linguistic minorities a right to establish an educational
institution that propagates religious or racial bigotry or ill will amongst
the people? Can the right under Article 30(1) be so exercised that it is
opposed to public morality or health? In the exercise of its right, would the
minority while establishing educational institutions not be bound by town
planning rules and regulations? Can they construct and maintain buildings in
any manner they desire without complying with the provisions of the building
by-laws or health regulations?

94\. In order to interpret Article 30 and its interplay, it any, with Article
29, our attention was drawn to the Constituent Assembly Debates. While
referring to them, the learned Solicitor General submitted that the provisions
of Article 29(2) were intended to be applicable to minority institutions
seeking protection of Article 30. He argued that if any educational
institution sought aid, it could not deny admission only on the ground of
religion, race, caste or language and, consequently giving a preference to the
minority over more meritorious non- minority students was impermissible. It is
now necessary to refer to some of the decisions of this Court insofar as they
interpret Articles 29 and 30, and to examine whether any creases therein need
ironing out.

95\. In The State of Madras v. Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan [(1951) SCR 525]
the State had issued an order, which provided that admission to students to
engineering and medical colleges in the State should be decided by the
Selection Committee strictly on the basis of the number of seats fixed for
different communities. While considering the validity of this order this Court
interpreted Article 29(2) and held that if admission was refused only on the
grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them, then there was a
clear breach of the fundamental right under Article 29(2). The said order was
construed as being violative of Article 29(2), because students who did not
fall in the particular categories were to be denied admission. In this
connection it was observed as follows:- ".....So far as those seats are
concerned, the petitioners are denied admission into any of them, not on any
ground other than the sole ground of their being Brahmins and not being
members of the community for whom those reservations were made....."

96\. This government order was held to be violative of the Constitution and
constitutive of a clear breach of Article 29(2). Article 30 did not come up
for consideration in that case.

97\. In The State of Bombay v.Bombay Education Society and Ors., the State had
issued a circular, the operative portion of which directed that no primary or
secondary school could, from the date of that circular admit to a class where
English was used as a medium of instruction, any pupil other than pupils
belonging to a section of citizens, the language of whom was English, viz,
Anglo-Indians and citizens of non-Asiatic descent. The validity of the
circular was challenged while admission was refused, inter alia, to a member
of the Gujarati Hindu Community. A number of writ petitions were filed and the
High Court allowed them. In an application filed by the State of Bombay, this
Court had to consider whether the said circular was ultra vires Article 29(2).
In deciding this question, the Court analyzed the provisions of Articles 29(2)
and 30, and repelled the contention that Article 29(2) guaranteed the right
only to the citizens of the minority group. It was observed, in this
connection, at page 579, as follows:

".....The language of Article 29(2) is wide and unqualified and may well cover
all citizens whether they belong to the majority or minority group. Article 15
protects all citizens against the State whereas the protection of Article
29(2) extends against the State or anybody who denies the right conferred by
it. Further Article 15 protects all citizens against discrimination generally
but Article 29(2) is a protection against a particular species of wrong namely
denial of admission into educational institutions of the specified kind. In
the next place Article 15 is quite general and wide in its terms and applies
to all citizens, whether they belong to the majority or minority groups, and
gives protection to all the citizens against discrimination by the State on
certain specific grounds. Article 29(2) confers a special right on citizens
for admission into educational institutions maintained or aided by the State.
To limit this right only to citizens belonging to minority groups will be to
provide a double protection for such citizens and to hold that the citizens of
the majority group have no special educational rights in the nature of a right
to be admitted into an educational institution for the maintenance of which
they make contributions by way of taxes. We see no cogent reason for such
discrimination. The heading under which Articles 29 and 30 are grouped
together - namely "Cultural and Educational Rights" is quite general and does
not in terms contemplate such differentiation. If the fact that the
institution is maintained or aided out of State funds is the basis of this
guaranteed right then all citizens, irrespective of whether they belong to the
majority or minority groups; are alike entitled to the protection of this
fundamental right....."

98\. It is clear from the aforesaid discussion that this Court came to the
conclusion that in the case of minority educational institutions to which
protection was available under Article 30, the provisions of Article 29(2)
were indeed applicable. But, it may be seen that the question in the present
from i.e., whether in the matter of admissions into aided minority educational
institutions, minority students could be preferred to a reasonable extent,
keeping in view the special protection given under Article 30(1), did not
arise for consideration in that case.

99\. In the Kerala Education Bill case, this Court again had the occasion to
consider the interplay of Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution. This case
was a reference under Article 143(1) of the Constitution made by the President
of India to obtain the opinion of this Court on certain questions relating to
the constitutional validity of some of the provisions of the kerala Education
Bill, 1957, which had been passed by the Kerala Legislative Assembly, but had
been reserved by the Governor for the consideration of the President. Clause
3(5) of the Bill, made the recognition of new schools subject to the other
provisions of the Bill and the rules framed by the Government under Clause
(36); Clause (15) authorized the Government to acquire any category of
schools; Clause 8(3) made it obligatory on all aided schools to hand over the
fees to the Government; Clauses 9 to 13 made provisions for the regulation and
management of the schools, payment of salaries to teachers and the terms and
conditions of their appointment, and Clause (33) forbade the granting of
temporary injunctions and interim orders in restraint of proceedings under the
Act.

100\. With reference to Article 29(2), the Court observed at page 1055, while
dealing with an argument based on Article 337 that "likewise Article 29(2)
provides, inter alia, that no citizen shall be denied admission into any
educational institution receiving did out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them". Referring to Part III of the
Constitution and to Articles 19 and 25 to 28 in particular, the Court said:-

".....Under Article 25 all persons are equally entitled, subject to public
order, morality and health and to the other provisions of Part III, to freedom
of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate
religion. Article 26 confers the fundamental right to every religious
denomination or any section thereof, subject to public order, morality and
health, to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable
purposes, to manage its own affairs in matters of religion, to acquire
property and to administer such property in accordance with law. The ideal
being to constitute India into a secular State, no religious instruction is,
under Article 28(1), to be provided in any educational institution wholly
maintained out of State funds and under Clause (3) of the same Article no
person attending any educational institution recognized by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds is to be required to take part in any
religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend
any religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any
premises attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a minor,
his guardian has given his consent thereto. Article 29(1) confers on any
section of the citizens having a distinct language, script or culture of its
own to have the right of conserving the same. Clause (2) of that Article
provides that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational
institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them."

101\. Dealing with Articles 29 and 30 at page 1046, it was observed as
follows:-

"Articles 29 and 30 are set out in Part III of our Constitution which
guarantees our fundamental rights. They are grouped together under the sub-
head "Cultural and Educational Rights". The text and the marginal notes of
both the Articles show that their purpose is to confer those fundamental
rights on certain sections of the community which constitute minority
communities. Under clause (1) of Article 29 any section of the citizens
residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own has the right to conserve the same. It
is obvious that a minority community can effectively conserve its language,
script or culture by and through educational institutions and, therefore, the
right to establish and maintain educational institutions of its choice is a
necessary concomitant to the right to conserve its distinctive language,
script or culture and that is what is conferred on all minorities by Article
30(1) which has hereinbefore been quoted in full. This right, however, is
subject to Clause 2 or Article 29 which provides that no citizen shall be
denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them."

102\. It had been, inter alia, contended on behalf of the state that if a
single member of any other community is admitted in a school establish for a
particular minority community, then the education institution would cease to
be an educational institution established by that particular minority
community. It was contended that because of Article 29(2), when an educational
institution established by a minority community gets aid, it would be
precluded from denying admission to members of other communities because of
Article 29(2), and that as a consequence thereof, it would cease to be an
educational institution of the choice of the minority community that
established it. Repelling this argument, it was observed at pages 1051-51, as
follows:-

".....This argument does not appear to us to be warranted by the language of
the Article itself. There is no such limitation in Article 30(1) and to accept
this limitation will necessarily involve the addition of the words "for their
own community" in the Article which is ordinarily not permissible according to
well established rules of interpretation. Nor is it reasonable to assume that
the purpose of Article 29(2) was to deprive minority educational institutions
of the aid they receive from the State. To say that an institution which
receives aid on account of its being minority educational institution must not
refuse to admit any member of any other community only on the grounds therein
mentioned and then to say that as soon as such institution admit such an
outsider it will cease to be a minority institution is tentamount to saying
that minority institutions will not, as minority institutions, be entitled to
any aid. The real import of Article 29(2) and Article 30(1) seems to us to be
that they clearly contemplate a minority institution with a sprinkling of
outsiders admitted into it. By admitting a non-member into it the minority
institution does not shed its character and cease to be a minority
institution. Indeed the object of conservation of the distinct language,
script and culture of a minority may be better served by propagating the same
amongst non-members of the particular minority community. In our opinion, it
is not possible to read this condition into Article 30(1) of the
Constitution."

103\. It will be seen that the use of the expression "sprinkling of outsiders"
in that case clearly implied the applicability of Article 29(2) to Article
30(1); the Court held that when a minority educational institution received
aid, outsiders would have to be admitted. This part of the state's contention
was accepted, but what was rejected was the contention that by taking
outsiders, a minority institution would cease to be an educational institution
of the choice of the minority community that established it. The Court
concluded at page 1062, as follows:- "...We have already observed that Article
30(1) gives two rights to the minorities, (1) to establish and (2) to
administer, educational institutions of their choice. The right to administer
cannot obviously include the right to maladminister. The minority cannot
surely ask for aid or recognition for an educational institution run by them
in unhealthy surroundings, without any competent teachers, possessing any
semblance of qualification, and which does not maintain even a fair standard
of teaching or which teaches matters subversive of the welfare of the
scholars. It stands to reason, then, that the constitutional right to
administer an educational institution of their choice does not necessarily
militate against the claim of the State to insist that in order to grant aid
the State may prescribe reasonable regulations to ensure the excellence of the
institutions to be aided....."

104\. While noting that Article 30 referred not only to religious minorities
but also to linguistic minorities, it was held that the Article gave those
minorities the right to establish educational institutions of their choice,
and that no limitation could be placed on the subjects to be taught at such
educational institutions and that general secular education is also
comprehended within the scope of Article 30(1). It is to be noted that the
argument addressed and answered in that case was whether a minority aided
institution loses its character as such by admitting non-minority students in
terms of Article 29(2). It was observed that the admission of 'sprinkling of
outsiders' will not deprive the institution of its minority status. The
opinion expressed therein does not really go counter to the ultimate view
taken by us in regard to the inter-play of Articles 30(1) and 29(2)

105\. In Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai and Ors. v. State of Bombay and Anr., this
Court had to consider the validity of an order issued by the Government of
Bombay whereby from the academic year 1955-56, 80% of the seats in the
training colleges for teachers in non-government training colleges were to be
reserved for the teachers nominated by the Government. The petitioner, who
belonged to the minority community, were, inter alia, running a training
college for teachers, as also primary schools. The said primary schools and
college were conducted for the benefit of the religious denomination of the
United Church of Northern India and Indian Christians generally, though
admission was not denied to students belonging to other communities. The
petitioners challenged the government order requiring 80% of the seats to be
filled by nominees of the government, inter alia, on the ground that the
petitioners were members of a religious denomination and that they constituted
a religious minority, and that the educational institutions had been
established primarily for the benefit of the Christian community. It was the
case of the petitioners that the decision of the Government violated their
fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 30(1), 26(a), (b), (c) and (d), and
19(1)(f) and (g). While interpreting Article 30, it was observed by this Court
at pages 849-850 as under:- "....All minorities, linguistic or religious have
by Article 30(1) an absolute right to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice; and any law or executive direction which seeks
to infringe the substance of that right under Article 30(1) would to that
extent to void. This, however, is not to say that it is not open to the State
to impose regulations upon the exercise of this right. The fundamental freedom
is to establish and to administer educational institutions: it is a right to
establish and administer what are in truth educational institutions,
institutions which cater to the educational needs of the citizens, or sections
thereof. Regulation made in the true interests of efficiency of instruction,
discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public order and the like may
undoubtedly be imposed. Such regulations are not restrictions on the substance
of the right which is guaranteed: they secure the proper functioning of the
institution, in matters educational."

106\. While coming to the conclusion that the right of the private training
colleges to admit students of their choice was severely restricted, this Court
referred to the opinion in the Kerala Education Bill case, but distinguished
it by observing that the Court did not, in that case, lay down any test of
reasonableness of the regulation. No general principle on which the
reasonableness of a regulation may be tested was sought to be laid down in the
Kerala Education Bill case and, therefore, it was held in Sidhajbhai Sabhai's
case that the opinion in that case was not an authority for the proposition
that all regulative measures, which were not destructive or annihilative of
the character of the institution established by the minority, provided the
regulations were in the national or public interests, were valid. In this
connection it was further held at page 856, as follows:-

"The right established by Article 30(1) is a fundamental right declared in
terms absolute. Unlike the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by Article 19, it
is not subject to reasonable restrictions. It is intended to be a real right
for the protection of the minorities in the matter of setting up of
educational institutions of their own choice. The right is intended to be
effective and is not to be whittled down by so-called regulative measures
conceived in the interest not of the minority educational institution, but of
the public or the nation as a whole. If every order which while maintaining
the formal character of a minority institution destroys the power of
administration is held justifiable because it is in the public or national
interests, though not in its interest as an educational institution, the right
guaranteed by Article 30(1) will be but a "teasing illusion", a promise of
unreality. Regulations which may lawfully be imposed either by legislative or
executive action as a condition of receiving grant or of recognition must be
directed to making the institution while retaining its character as a minority
institution effective as an educational institution. Such regulation must
satisfy a dual test - the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is
regulative of the educational character of the institution and is conducive to
making the institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority
community or other persons who resort to it."

107\. The aforesaid decision does indicate that the right under Article 30(1)
is not so absolute as to prevent the government from making any regulation
whatsoever. As already noted hereinabove, in Sidhajbhai Sabhai's case, it was
laid down that regulations made in the true interests of efficiency of
instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality and public order could
be imposed. If this is so, it is difficult to appreciate how the government
can be prevented from framing regulations that are in the national interest,
as it seems to be indicated in the passage quoted hereinabove. Any regulation
framed in the national interest must necessarily apply to all educational
institutions, whether run by the majority or the minority. Such a limitation
must necessarily be read into Article 30. The right under Article 30(1) cannot
be such as to override the national interest or to prevent the government from
framing regulations in that behalf. It is, of course, true that government
regulations cannot destroy the minority character of the institution or make
the right to establish and administer a mere illusion; but the right under
Article 30 is not so absolute as to be above the law. It will further be seen
that in Sidhajbhai Sabhai's case, no reference was made to Article 29(2) of
the Constitution. This decision, therefore, cannot be an authority for the
proposition canvassed before us.

108\. Out attention was invited to the decision in Rev. Father W. Proost and
Ors. v. The State of Bihar and Ors., but the said case has no application
here. In that case, it was contended, on behalf of the State of Bihar, that as
the protection to the minority under Article 29(1) was only a right to
conserve a distinct language, script or culture of its own, the college did
not qualify for the protection of Article 30(1) because it was not founded to
conserve them and that consequently, it was open to all sections of the
people. The question, therefore, was whether the college could claim the
protection of Section 48-B of the Bihar Universities Act read with Article
30(1) of the Constitution, only if it proved that the educational institution
was furthering the rights mentioned in Article 29(1). Section 48-B of the
Bihar Universities Act exempted a minority educational institution based on
religion or language from the operation of some of the other provisions of
that Act. This Court, while construing Article 30, held that its width could
not be cut down by introducing in it considerations on which Article 29(1) was
based. Article 29(1) and 30(1) were held to create two separate rights, though
it was possible that they might meet in a given case. While dealing with the
contention of the state that the college would not be entitled to the
protection under Article 30(1) because it was open to all sections of the
people, the Court referred to the observations in the Kerala Education Bill
case, wherein it had been observed that the real import of Article 29(2) and
Article 30(1) was that they contemplated a minority institution with a
sprinkling of outsiders admitted into it. The Court otherwise had no occasion
to deal with the applicability of Article 29(2) to Article 30(1).

109\. In State of Kerala, Etc. v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, Etc. [(1971) 1
SCR 734], the challenge was to various provisions of the Kerala University
Act, 1969, whose provisions effected private colleges, particularly those
founded by minority communities in the State of Kerala. The said provisions,
inter alia, sought to provide for the manner in which private colleges were to
be administered through the constitution of the governing body or managing
councils in the manner provided by the Act. Dealing with Article 30, it was
observed at pages 739-40 as follows:- "Article 30(1) has been construed before
by this Court. Without referring to those cases it is sufficient to say that
the clause contemplates two rights which are separated in point of time. The
first right is the initial right to establish institutions of the minority's
choice. Establishment here means the bringing into being of an institution and
it must be by a minority community. It matters not if a single philanthropic
individual with his own means, founds the institution or the community at
large contributes the funds. The position in law is the same and the intention
in either case must be to found an institution for the benefit of a minority
community by a member of that community. It is equally irrelevant that in
addition to the minority community others from other minority communities or
even from the majority community can take advantage of these institutions.
Such other communities bring in income and they do not have to be turned away
to enjoy the protection.

The next part of the right relates to the administration of such institutions.
Administration means 'management of the affairs' of the institution. This
management must be free of control so that the founders or their nominees can
mould the institution as they think fit, and in accordance with their ideas of
how the interest of the community in general and the institution in particular
will be best served. No part of this management can be taken away and vested
in another body without an encroachment upon the guaranteed right."

The Court, however, pointed out that an exception to the right under Article
30 was the power with the state to regulate education, educational standards
and allied matters. It was held that the minority institutions could not be
allowed to fall below the standards of excellence expected of educational
institutions or under guise of the exclusive right of management, allowed to
decline to follow general pattern. The Court stated that while the management
must be left to minority, they may be compelled to keep in step with others.

110\. The interplay of Article 29 and Article 30 came up for consideration
again before this Court in the D.A.V. College case [1971 (Supp.) SCR 688].
Some of the provisions of the Guru Nanak University Act established after the
reorganization of the State of Punjab in 1969 provided for the manner in which
the governing body was to be constituted; the body was to include a
representative of the University and a member of the College. These and some
other provisions were challenged on the ground that they were violative of
Article 30. In this connection at page 695, it was observed as follows:-

"It will be observed that Article 29(1) is wider than Article 30(1), in that,
while any Section of the citizens including the minorities, can invoke the
rights guaranteed under Article 29(1), the rights guaranteed under Article
30(1) are only available to the minorities based on religion or language. It
is not necessary for Article 30(1) that the minority should be both a religion
minority as well as a linguistic minority. It is sufficient if it is one or
the other or both. A reading of these two Articles together would lead us to
conclude that a religious or linguistic minority has a right to establish and
administer educational institutions of its choice for effectively conserving
its distinctive language, script or culture, which right however is subject to
the regulatory power of the State for maintaining and facilitating the
excellence of its standards. This right is further subject to Clause (2) of
Article 29 which provides that no citizen shall be denied admission into any
educational institution which is maintained by the State or receives aid out
of State funds, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of
them. While this is so these two articles are not inter-linked nor does it
permit of their being always read together."

Though it was observed that Article 30(1) is subject to 29(2), the question
whether the preference to minority students is altogether excluded, was not
considered.

111\. One of the questions that arose in this case was as to whether the
petitioner was a minority institution. In this case, it was also observed that
the Hindus of Punjab were a religion minority in the State of Punjab and that,
therefore, they were entitled to the protection of Article 30(1). Three of the
provisions, which were sought to be challenged as being violative of Article
30, were Clauses 2(1), 17 and 18 of the Statutes framed by the University
under Section 19 of the University Act. Clause 2(1)(a) provided that, for
seeking affiliation, the college was to have a governing body of not more than
20 persons approved by the Senate and including, amongst others, two
representatives of the University and a member of the College. Clause 17
required the approval of the Vice- Chancellor for the staff initially
appointed by the College. The said provision also provided that all subsequent
changes in the staff were to be reported to the Vice-Chancellor for his/her
approval. Clause 18 provided that non-government colleges were to comply with
the requirements laid down in the ordinances governing the service and conduct
of teachers in non- government colleges, as may be framed by the University.
After referring to Kerala Education Bill, Sidhajb (SIC) Sabhai and Rev. Father
W. Proost, this Court held that there was no justification for the provisions
contained in Clause 2(1)(a) and Clause 17 of the statutes as the interfered
with the rights of management of the minority educational institutions, P.
Jaganmohan Reddy, J., observed that "these provisions cannot, therefore, be
made as conditions of affiliation, the non-compliance of which would involved
disaffiliation and consequently they will have to be struck down as offending
Article 30(1)."

112\. Clause 18, however, was held not to suffer from the same vice as Clause
17 because the provision, insofar as it was applicable to the minority
institutions, empowered the University to prescribe by-regulations governing
the service and conduct of teachers, and that this was in the larger interest
of the institutions, and in order to ensure their efficiency and excellence.
In this connection, it was observed at page 709, that:-

"Uniformity in the conditions of service and conduct of teachers in all non-
Government Colleges would make for harmony and avoid frustration. Of course
while the power to make ordinances in respect of the matters referred to is
unexceptional the nature of the infringement of the right, if any, under
Article 30(1) will depend on the actual purpose and import of the ordinance
when made and the manner in which it is likely to affect the administration of
the educational institution, about which it is not possible now to predicate."

113\. In The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society and Anr. Etc. v. State of
Gujarat and Anr., this Court had to consider the constitutional validity of
certain provisions of the Gujarat University Act, 1949, insofar as they were
made to apply to the minority Christian institution. The impugned provisions,
inter alia, provided that the University may determine that all instructions,
teaching and training in courses of studies, in respect of which the
University was competent to hold examinations, would be conducted by the
University and would be imparted by the teachers of the University. Another
provision provided that new colleges that may seek affiliation, were to be the
constituent colleges of the University. The Court considered the scope and
ambit of the rights of the minorities, whether based on religion or language,
to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice under
Article 30(1) of the Constitution. In dealing with this aspect, Ray, C.J., at
page 192, while considering Article 25 to 30, observed as follows:-

"Every section of the public, the majority as well as minority has rights in
respect of religion as contemplated in Articles 25 and 26 and rights in
respect of language, script, culture as contemplated in Article 29. The whole
object of conferring the right on minorities under Article 30 is to ensure
that there will be equality between the majority and the minority. If the
minorities do not have such special protection they will be denied equality."

114\. Elaborating on the meaning and intent of Article 30, the learned Chief
Justice further observed as follows:-

"The real reason embodied in Article 30(1) of the Constitution is the
conscience of the nation that the minorities, religious as well as linguistic,
are not prohibited from establishing and administering educational
institutions of their choice for the purpose of giving their children the best
general education to make them complete men and women of the country. The
minorities are given this protection under Article 30 in order to preserve and
strengthen the integrity and unity of the country. The sphere of general
secular education is intended to develop the commonness of boys and girls of
our country. This is in the true spirit of liberty, equality and fraternity
through the medium of education. If religious or linguistic minorities are not
given protection under Article 30 to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice, they will feel isolated and separate. General
secular education will open doors of perception and act as the natural light
of mind for our countrymen to live in the whole."

115\. The Court then considered whether the religious and linguistic
minorities, who have the right to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice, had a fundamental right to affiliation.
Recognizing that the affiliation to a University consisted of two parts, the
first part relating to syllabi, curricula, courses of instruction, the
qualifications of teachers, library, laboratories, conditions regarding health
and hygiene of students (aspects relating to establishment of educational
institutions), and the second part consisting of terms and conditions
regarding the management of institutions, it was held that with regard to
affiliation, a minority institution must follow the statutory measures
regulating educational standards and efficiency, prescribed courses of study,
courses of instruction, the principles regarding the qualification of
teachers, educational qualifications for entry of students into educational
institutions, etc.

116\. While considering the right of the religious and linguistic minorities
to administer their educational institutions, it was observed by Ray, C.J., at
page 194, as follows:-

".....The right to administer is said to consist of four principal matters.
First is the right to choose its managing or governing body. It is said that
the founders of the minority institution have faith and confidence in their
own committee or body consisting of persons selected by them. Second is the
right to choose its teachers. It is said that minority institutions want
teachers to have compatibility with the ideals, aims and aspirations of the
institution. Third is the right not to be compelled to refuse admission to
students. In other words, the minority institutions want to have the right to
admit students of their choice subject to reasonable regulations about
academic qualifications. Fourth is the right to use its properties and assets
for the benefit of its own institution."

117\. While considering this right to administer,it was held that the same was
not an absolute right and that the right was not free from regulation. While
referring to the observations of Das, C.J., in the Kerala Education Bill case,
it was reiterated in the St. Xaviers College case that the right to administer
was not a right to mal-administer. Elaborating the minority's right to
administer at page 196, it was observed as follows:- ".....The minority
institutions have the right to administer institutions. This right implies the
obligation and duty of the minority institutions to render the very best to
the students. In the right of administration, checks and balances in the shape
of regulatory measures are required to ensure the appointment of good teachers
and their conditions of service. The right to administer is to be tempered
with regulatory measures to facilitate smooth administration. The best
administration will reveal no trace colour of minority. A minority institution
should shine in exemplary eclecticism in the administration of the
institution. The best compliment that can be paid to a minority institution is
that it does not rest on or proclaim its minority character."

118\. Ray, C.J., concluded by observing at page 200, as follows:- "The
ultimate goal of a minority institution too imparting general secular
education is advancement of learning. This Court has consistently held that it
is not only permissible but also desirable to regulate everything in
educational and academic matters for achieving excellence and uniformity in
standards of education.

In the field of administration it is not reasonable to claim that minority
institutions will have complete autonomy. Checks on the administration may be
necessary in order to ensure that the administration is efficient and sound
and will serve the academic needs of the institution. The right of a minority
to administer its educational institution involves, as part of it, a
correlative duty of good administration."

119\. In a concurrent judgment, while noting that "Clause (2) of Article 29
forbids the denial of admission to citizens into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of then", Khanna, J. then examined
Article 30, and observed at page 222, as follows:- "Clause (1) of Article 30
gives right to all minorities, whether based on religion or language, to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice Analyzing
that clause it would follow that the right which has been conferred by the
clause is no two types of minorities. Those minorities may be based either on
religion or on language. The right conferred upon the said minorities is to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The word
"establish" indicates the rights to bring into existence, while the right to
administer an institution means the right to effectively manage and conduct
the affairs of the institution. Administration connotes management of the
affairs of the institution. The management must be free of control so that the
founders or their nominees can mould the institution as they think fit and in
accordance with their ideas of how the interest of the community in general
and the institution in particular will be best served. The words "of their
choice" qualify the educational institutions and show that the educational
institutions established and administered by the minorities need not be of
some particular class; the minorities have the right and freedom to establish
and administer such educational institutions as they choose. Clause (2) of
Article 30 prevents the State from making discrimination in the matter of
grant of aid to any educational institution on the ground that the institution
is under the management of a minority whether based on religion or language.

120\. Explaining the rationale behind Article 30, it was observed at page 224,
as follows:-

"The idea of giving some special rights to the minorities is not to have a
kind of a privileged or pampered section of the population but to give to the
minorities a sense of security and a feeling of confidence. The great leaders
of India since time immemorial had preached the doctrine of tolerance and
catholicity of outlook. Those noble ideas were enshrined in the Constitution.
Special rights for minorities were designed not to create inequality. Their
real effect was to bring about equality by ensuring the preservation of the
minority institutions and by guaranteeing to the minorities autonomy in the
matter of the administration of these institutions. The differential treatment
for the minorities by giving them special rights is intended to bring about an
equilibrium, so that the ideal of equality may not be reduced to a mere
abstract idea but should become a living reality and result in true, genuine
equality an equality not merely in theory but also in fact."

121\. While advocating that provisions of the Constitution should be construed
according to the liberal, generous and sympathetic approach, and after
considering the principles which could be discerned by him from the earlier
decisions of this Court, Khanna, J., observed at page 234, as follows:-

"...The minorities are as much children of the soil as the majority and the
approach has been to ensure that nothing should be done as might deprive the
minorities of a sense of belonging of a feeling of security, of a
consciousness of equality and of the awareness that the conservation of their
religion, culture, language and script as also the protection of their
educational institutions is a fundamental right enshrined in the Constitution.
The same generous, liberal and sympathetic approach should weigh with the
courts in construing Articles 29 and 30 as marked the deliberations of the
Constitution-makers in drafting those articles and making them part of the
fundamental rights. The safeguarding of the interest of the minorities amongst
sections of population is as important as the protection of the interest
amongst individuals of persons who are below the age of majority or are
otherwise suffering from some kind of infirmity. the Constitution and the laws
made by civilized nations, therefore, generally contain provisions for the
protection of those interests. It can, indeed, be said to be an index of the
level of civilization and catholicity of a nation as to how far their
minorities feel secure and are not subject to any discrimination or
suppression."

122\. The learned Judge then observed that the right of the minorities to
administer educational institutions did not prevent the making of reasonable
regulations in respect of these institutions. Recognizing that the right to
administer educational institutions could not include the right to mal-
administer, it was held that regulations could be lawfully imposed, for the
receiving of grants and recognition, while permitting the institution to
retain its character as a minority institution. The regulation "must satisfy a
dual test -- the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is regulative of
the educational character of the institution and is conductive to making the
institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority community or
other persons who resort to it." It was permissible for the authorities to
prescribes regulations, which must be complied with, before a minority
institution could seek or retain affiliation and recognition. But it was also
stated that the regulations made by the authority should not impinge upon the
minority character of the institution. Therefore, a balance has to be kept
between the two objectives

\-- that of ensuring the standard of excellence of the institution, and that
of preserving the right of the minorities to establish and administer their
educational institutions. Regulations that embraced and reconciled the two
objectives could be considered to be reasonable. This, in our view, is the
correct approach to the problem.

123\. After referring to the earlier cases in relation to the appointment of
teachers, it was noted by Khanna, J., that the conclusion which followed was
that a law which interfered with a minority's choice of qualified teachers, or
its disciplinary control over teachers and other members of the staff of the
institution, was void, as it was violative of Article 30(1). While it was
permissible for the state and its educational authorities to prescribe the
qualifications of teachers, it was held that once the teachers possessing the
requisite qualifications were selected by the minorities for their educational
institutions, the state would have no right to veto the selection of those
teachers. The selection and appointment of teachers for an educational
institution was regarded as one of the essential ingredients under Article
30(1). The Court's attention was drawn to the fact that in the Kerala
Education Bill case, this Court has opined that Clauses (11) and (12) made it
obligatory for all aided schools to select teachers from a panel selected from
each district by the Public Service Commission and that no teacher of an aided
school could be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank without the previous
sanction of the authorized officer. At page 245, Khanna, J., observed that in
cases subsequent to the opinion in the Kerala Education Bill case, this Court
had held similar provisions as Clause (11) and Clause (12) to be violative of
Article 30(1) of the minority institution. He then observed as follows:-
"...The opinion expressed by this Court in Re Kerala Education Bill (supra)
was of an advisory character and though great weight should be attached to it
because of its persuasive value, the said opinion cannot override the opinion
subsequently expressed by this Court in contested cases. It is the law
declared by this Court in the subsequent contested cases which would have a
binding effect. The words "as at present advised" as well as the preceding
sentence indicate that the view expressed by this Court in Re Kerala Education
Bill in this respect was hesitant and tentative and not a final view in the
matter...."

124\. In Lilly Kurian v. Sr. Lewina and Ors., this Court struck down the power
of the Vice-Chancellor to veto the decision of the management to impose a
penalty on a teacher. It was held that the power of the Vice- Chancellor,
while hearing an appeal against the imposition of the panel was uncanalized
and unguided. In Christian Medical College Hospital Employees' Union and Anr.
v. Christian Medical College Vellore Association and Ors., this Court upheld
the application of industrial law to minority colleges, and it was held that
providing a remedy against unfair dismissals would not infringe Article 30. In
Gandhi Faizeam College Shahajhanpur v. University of Agra and Anr. [(1975) 3
SCR 810], a law which sought to regulate the working of minority institutions
by providing that a broad-based management committee could be re-constituted
by including therein the Principal and the senior-most teacher, was valid and
not violative of the right under Article 30(1) of the Constitution. In All
Saints High School, Hyderabad Etc. Etc. v. Government of A.P. and Ors. Etc, a
regulation providing that no teacher would be dismissed, removed, or reduced
in rank, or terminated otherwise except with the prior approval of the
competent authority, was held to be invalid, as it sought to confer an
unqualified power upon the competent authority. In Frank Anthony Public School
Employees Association v. Union of India and Ors., the regulation providing for
prior approval for dismissal was held to be invalid, while the provision for
an appeal against the order of dismissal by an employee to a Tribunal was
upheld. The regulation requiring prior approval before suspending an employee
was held to be valid, but the provision, which exempted unaided minority
schools from the regulation that equated the pay and other benefits of
employees of recognized schools with those in schools run by the authority,
was held to be invalid and violative of the equality clause. It was held by
this Court that the regulations regarding pay and allowances for teachers and
staff would not violate Article 30.

125\. In the St. Stephen's College case, the right of minorities to administer
educational institutions and the applicability of Article 29(2) to an
institution to which Article 30(1) was applicable came up for consideration.
St. Stephen's College claimed to be a minority institution, which was
affiliated to Delhi University, the College had its own provisions with regard
to the admission of students. This provision postulated that applications
would be invited by the college by a particular date. The applications were
processed and a cut-off percentage for each subject was determined by the Head
of the respective Departments and a list of potentially suitable candidates
was prepared on the basis of 1:4 and 1:5 ratios for Arts and Science students
respectively, and they were then called for an interview (i.e., for every
available seat in the Arts Department, four candidates were called for
interviews; similarly, for every available seat in the Science Department,
five candidates were called for interviews). In respect of Christian Students,
a relaxation of upto 10% was given in determining the cut-off point.
Thereafter, the interviews were conducted and admission was granted. The Delhi
University, however, had issued a circular, which provided that admission
should be granted to the various courses purely on the basis of merit, i.e.,
the percentage of marks secured by the students in the qualifying examination.
The said circular did not postulate any interview. Thereafter, the admission
policy of St. Stephen's College was challenged by a petition under Article 32.
It was contended by the petitioners that the College was bound to follow the
University policy, rules and regulations regarding admission, and further
argued that it was not a minority institution, and in the alternative, it was
not entitled to discriminate against students on the ground of religion, as
the college was receiving grant-in-aid from the government, and that such
discrimination was violative of Article 29(2). The College had also filed a
writ petition in the Supreme Court taking the stand that it was a religious
minority institution, and that the circular of the University regarding
admission violated its fundamental right under Article

30\. This Court held that St. Stephen's College was a minority institution.
With regard to the second question as to whether the college was bound by the
University circulars regarding admission, this Court, by a majority of 4-1,
upheld the admission procedure used by the College, even though it was
different from the one laid down by the University. In this context, the
contention of the College was that it had been following its own admission
programme for more than a hundred years and that it had built a tradition of
excellence in a number of distinctive activities. The College challenged the
University circular on the ground that it was not regulatory in nature, and
that it violated its right under Article 30. Its submission was that if
students were admitted purely on the basis of marks obtained by them in the
qualifying examination, it would not be possible for any Christian student to
gain admission. The college had also found that unless a concession was
afforded, the Christian students could not be brought within the zone of
consideration as they generally lacked merit when compared to the other
applicants. This Court referred to the earlier decisions, and with regard to
Article 30(1), observed at page 596, paragraph 54, as follows:- "The
minorities whether based on religion or language have the right to establish
and administer educational institutions of their choice. The administration of
educational institutions of their choice under Article 30(1) means 'management
of the affairs of the institution'. This management must be free from control
so that the founder or their nominees can mould the institution as they think
fit, and in accordance with their ideas of how the interests of the community
in general and the institution in particular will be best served. But the
standards of education are not a part of the management as such. The standard
concerns the body politic and is governed by considerations of the advancement
of the country and its people. Such regulations do not bear directly upon
management although they may indirectly affect it. The State, therefore has
the right to regulate the standard of education and allied matters. Minority
institutions cannot be permitted to fall below the standards of excellence
expected of educational institutions. They cannot decline to follow the
general pattern of education under the guise of exclusive right of management.
While the management must be left to them, they may be compelled to keep in
step with others...."

126\. It was further noticed that the right under Article 30(1) had to be read
subject to the power of the state to regulate education, educational standards
and allied matters. In this connection, at pages 598-99, paragraph 59, it was
observed as follows:-

"The need for a detailed study on this aspect is indeed not necessary. The
right to minorities whether religious or linguistic, to administer educational
institutions and the power of the State to regulate academic matters and
management is now fairly well settled. The right to administer does not
include the right to maladminister. The State being the controlling authority
has right and duty to regulate all academic matters. Regulations which will
serve the interests of students and teachers, and to preserve the uniformity
in standards of education among the affiliated institutions could be made. The
minority institutions cannot claim immunity against such general pattern and
standard or against general laws such as laws relating to law and order,
health, hygiene, labor relations, social welfare legislations, contracts,
torts etc. which are applicable to all communities. So long as the basic right
of minorities to manage educational institution is not taken away, the State
is competent to make regulatory legislation. Regulations, however, shall not
have the effect of depriving the right of minorities to educate their children
in their own institution. That is a privilege which is implied in the right
conferred by Article 30(1).

127\. Dealing with the question of the selection of students, it was accepted
that the right to select students for admission was a part of administration,
and that this power could be regulated, but it was held that the regulation
must be reasonable and should be conducive to the welfare of the minority
institution or for the betterment of those who resort to it. Bearing this
principle in mind, this Court took note of the fact that if the College was to
admit students as per the circular issued by the University, it would have to
deny admissions to the students belonging to the Christian community because
of the prevailing situation that even after the concession, only a small
number of minority applicants would gain admission. It was the case of the
College that the selection was made on the basis of the candidate's academic
record, and his/her performance at the interview keeping in mind his/her all
round competence, his/her capacity to benefit from attendance at the College,
as well as his/her capacity to benefit from attendance at the College, as well
as his/her potential to contribute to the life of the College. While observing
that the oral interview as a supplementary test and not as the exclusive test
for assessing the suitability of the candidates for college admission had been
recognized by this Court, this Court observed that the admission programme of
the college "based on the test of promise and accomplishment of candidates
seems to be better than the blind method of selection based on the marks
secured in the qualifying examinations." The Court accordingly held that St.
Stephen's College was not bound by the impugned circulars of the University.
This Court then dealt with the question as to whether a preference in favour
of, or a reservation of seats for candidates belonging to, its own community
by the minority institutions would be invalid under Article 29(2) of the
Constitution. After referring to the Constituent Assembly Debates and the
proceedings of the Draft Committee that led to the incorporation of Articles
29 and 30, this Court proceeded to examine the question of the true import and
effect of Articles 29(2) and 30(1) of the Constitution. On behalf of the
institutions, it was argued that a preference given to minority candidates in
their own educational institutions, on the ground that those candidates
belonged to that minority community, was not violative of Article 29(2), and
that in the exercise of Article 30(1), the minorities were entitled to
establish and administer educational institutions for the exclusive advantage
of their own community's candidates. This contention was not accepted by this
Court on two grounds. Firstly, it was held that institutional preference to
minority candidates based on religion was apparently an institutional
discrimination on the forbidden ground of religion -- the Court stated that
"if an educational institution says yes to one candidate but says no to other
candidate on the ground of religion, it amounts to discrimination on the
ground of religion. The mandate of Article 29(2) is that there shall not be
any such discrimination." It further held that, as pointed out in the Kerala
Education Bill case, the minorities could not establish educational
institutions for the benefit of their own community alone. For if such was the
aim, Article 30(1) would have been differently worded and it would have
contained the words "for their own community". In this regard, it would be
useful to bear in mind that the Court at page 607, paragraph 81, noticed
that:-

"Even in practice, such claims are likely to be met with considerable
hostility. It may not be conducive to have a relatively homogeneous society.
It may lead to religious bigotry which is the bane of mankind. In the nation
building with secular character sectarian schools or colleges, segregated
faculties or universities for imparting general secular education are
undesirable and they may undermine secular democracy. They would be
inconsistent with the central concept of secularism and equality embedded in
the Constitution. Every educational institution irrespective of community to
which it belongs is a 'melting pot' in our national life. The students and
teachers are the critical ingredients. It is there they develop respect for,
and tolerance of, the cultures and beliefs of others. It is essential
therefore, that there should be proper mix of students of different
communities in all educational institutions.

128\. The Court then dealt with the contention on behalf of the University
that the minority institutions receiving government aid were bound by the
mandate of Article 29(2), and that they could not prefer candidates from their
own community. The Court referred to the decision in the case of Champakam
Dorairajan (supra), but observed as follows: ".....the fact that Article 29(2)
applied to minorities as well as non- minorities did not mean that it was
intended to nullify the special right guaranteed to minorities in Article
30(1). Article 29(2) deals with non- discrimination and is available only to
individuals. General equality by non-discrimination is not the only need of
minorities. Minority rights under majority rule implies more than non-
discrimination; indeed, it begins with non-discrimination. Protection of
interests and institutions and the advancement of opportunity are just as
important. Differential treatment that distinguishes them from the majority is
a must to preserve their basic characteristics."

129\. Dealing with the submission that in a secular democracy the government
could not be utilized to promote the interest of any particular community, and
that the minority institution was not entitled to state aid as of right, this
Court, at page 609, paragraph 87, held as follows:- "It is quite true that
there is no entitlement to State grant for minority educational institutions.
There was only a stop-gap arrangement under Article 337 for the Anglo-Indian
community to receive State grants. There is no similar provision for other
minorities to get grant from the State. But under Article 30(2), the State is
under an obligation to maintain equality of treatment in granting aid to
educational institutions. Minority institutions are not to be treated
differently while giving financial assistance. They are entitled to get the
financial assistance much the same way as the institutions of the majority
communities."

130\. It was further held that the state could lay down reasonable conditions
for obtaining grant-in-aid and for its proper utilization, but that the state
had no power to compel minority institutions to give up their rights under
Article 30(1). After referring to the Kerala Education Bill case and
Sidhajbhai Sabhai's case, the Court observed at page 609, paragraph 88, as
follows:-

"....In the latter case this court observed at SCR pages 856-57 that the
regulation which may lawfully be imposed as a condition of receiving grant
must be directed in making the institution an effective minority educational
institution. The regulation cannot change the character of the minority
institution. Such regulations must satisfy a dual test; the test of
reasonableness, and the test that it is regulative of the educational
character of the institution. It must be conducive to making the institution
and effective vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons
who resort to it. It is thus evident that the rights under Article 30(1)
remain unaffected even after securing financial assistance from the
government."

131\. After referring to the following observations in D.A.V. College case,
"...The right of a religious or linguistic minority to establish and
administer educational institutions of its choice under Article 30(1) is
subject to the regulatory power of the State for maintaining and (sic)ng the
excellence of its standards. This right is further subject to Article 29(2),
which provides that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational
institution which is maintained by the State or receives aid out of State
funds, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them...."

the learned Judges remarked at page 610 (para 91) that in the said case, the
Court was not deciding the question that had arisen before them.

132\. According to the learned Judges, the question of the interplay of
Article 29(2) with Article 30(1) had arisen in that case (St. Stephen's case)
for the first time, and had not been considered by the Court earlier, they
observed that "we are on virgin soil, not on trodden ground". Dealing with the
interplay of these two Articles, it was observed, at page 612, paragraph 96,
as follows:-

"The collective minority right is required to be made functional and is not to
be reduced to useless lumber. A meaningful right must be shaped, moulded and
created under Article 30(1), while at the same time affirming the right of
individuals under Article 29(2). There is need to strike a balance between the
two competing rights. It is necessary to mediate between Article 29(2) and
Article 30(1), between letter and spirit of these articles, between traditions
of the past and the convenience of the present, between society's need for
stability and its need for change."

133\. The two competing rights are the right of the citizen not to be denied
admission granted under Article 29(2), and right of the religious or
linguistic minority to administer and establish an institution of its choice
granted under Article 30(1). While treating Article 29(2) as a facet of
equality, the Court gave a contextual interpretation to Articles 29(2) and
30(1) while rejecting the extreme contention on both sides, i.e., on behalf of
the institutions that Article 29(2) did not prevent a minority institution to
preferably admit only members belonging to the minority community, and the
contention on behalf of the State that Article 29(2) prohibited any preference
in favour of a minority community for whose benefit the institution was
established. The Court concluded, at pages 613-14, para 102, as follows:-

"In the light of all these principles and factors, and in view of the
importance which the Constitution attaches to protective measures to
minorities under Article 30(1), the minority aided educational institutions
are entitled to prefer their community candidates to maintain the minority
character of the institutions subject of course to conformity with the
University standard. The State may regulate the intake in this category with
due regard to the need of the community in the area which the institution is
intended to serve. But in no case such intake shall exceed 50 per cent of the
annual admission. The minority institutions shall make available at least 50
per cent of the annual admission to members of communities other than the
minority community. The admission of other community candidates shall be done
purely on the basis of merit."

134\. If we keep these basic features, as highlighted in St. Stephen's case,
in view, then the real purposes underlying Articles 29(2) and 30 can be better
appreciated.

135\. We agree with the contention of the learned Solicitor General that the
Constitution in Part III does not contain or give any absolute right. All
rights conferred in Part III of the Constitution are subject to at least other
provisions of the said Part. It is difficult to comprehend that the framers of
the Constitution would have given such an absolute right to the religious or
linguistic minority which would enable them to establish and administer
educational institutions in manner so as to be in conflict with the other
Parts of the Constitution. We find difficult to accept that in the
establishment and administration of educational institutions by the religious
and linguistic minorities, no law of the land, even the Constitution, is to
apply to them.

136\. Decisions of this Court have held that the right to administer does not
include the right to mal-administer. It has also been held that the right to
administer is not absolute, but must be subject to reasonable regulations for
the benefit of the institutions as the vehicle of education, consistent with
national interest. General laws of the land applicable to all persons have
been held to be applicable to the minority institutions also -- for example,
laws relating to taxation, sanitation, social welfare, economic regulation,
public order and morality.

137\. It follows from the aforesaid decisions that even though the words of
Article 30(1) are unqualified, this Court has held that at least certain other
laws of the land pertaining to health, morality and standards of education
apply. The right under Article 30(1) has, therefore, not been held to be
absolute or above other provisions of the law, and we reiterate the same. By
the same analogy, there is no reason why regulations or conditions concerning,
generally, the welfare of students and teachers should not be made applicable
in order to provide a proper academic atmosphere, as such provisions do not in
any way interfere with the right of administration or management under Article
30(1).

138\. As we look at it, Article 30(1) is a sort of guarantee or assurance to
the linguistic and religious minority institutions of their right to establish
and administer educational institutions of their choice. Secularism and
equality being two of the basic features of the Constitution, Article 30(1)
ensures protection to the linguistic and religious minorities, thereby
preserving the secularism of the country. Furthermore, the principles of
equality must necessarily apply to the enjoyment of such rights. No law can be
framed that will discriminate against such minorities with regard to the
establishment and administration of educational institutions vis-a-vis other
educational institutions. Any law or rule or regulation that would put the
educational institutions run by the minorities at a disadvantage when compared
to the institutions run by the others will have to be struck down. At the same
time, there also cannot be any reverse discrimination. It was observed in St.
Xaviers College case, at page 192, that "the whole object of conferring the
right on minorities under Article 30 is to ensure that there will be equality
between the majority and the minority. If the minorities do not have such
special protection, they will be dented equality." In other words, the essence
of Article 30(1) is to ensure equal treatment between the majority and the
minority institutions. No one type or category of institution should be
disfavoured or, for that matter, receive more favourable treatment than
another. Laws of the land, including rules and regulations, must apply equally
to the majority institutions as well as to the minority institutions. The
minority institutions must be allowed to do what the non- minority
institutions are permitted to do.

139\. Like any other private unaided institutions, similar unaided educational
institutions administered by linguistic or religious minorities are assured
maximum autonomy in relation thereto; e.g., method of recruitment of teachers,
charging of fees and admission of students. They will have to comply with the
conditions of recognition, which cannot be such as to whittle down the right
under Article 30.

140\. We have now to address the question of whether Article 30 gives a right
to ask for a grant or aid from the state, and secondly, if it does get aid, to
examine to what extent its autonomy in administration, specifically in the
matter of admission to the educational institution established by the
community, can be curtailed or regulated.

141\. The grant of aid is not a constitutional imperative. Article 337 only
gives the right to assistance by way of grant to the Anglo-Indian community
for a specified period of time. If no aid is granted to anyone, Article 30(1)
would not justify a demand for aid, and it cannot be said that the absence of
aid makes the right under Article 30(1). The founding fathers have not
incorporated the right to grants in Article 30, whereas they have done so
under Article 337; what, then, is the meaning, scope and effect of Article
30(2)? Article 30(2) only means what it states, viz that a minority
institution shall not be discriminated against when aid to educational
institutions is granted. In other words the state cannot, when it chooses to
grant aid to educational institutions, deny aid to a religious or linguistic
minority institution only on the ground that the management of that
institution is with the minority. We would, however, like to clarify that if
an object surrender of the right to management is made a condition of aid, the
denial of aid would be violative of Article 30(2). However, conditions of aid
that do not involve a surrender of the substantial right of management would
not be inconsistent with constitutional guarantees, even if they indirectly
impinge upon some fact of administration. If, however, aid were denied on the
ground that the educational institution is under the management of a minority,
then such a denial would be completely invalid.

142\. The implication of Article 30(2) is also that it recognizes that the
minority nature of the institution should continue, notwithstanding the grant
of aid. In other words, when a grant is given to all institutions for
imparting secular education, a minority institution is also entitled to
receive it subject to the fulfillment of the requisite criteria, and the state
gives the grant knowing that a linguistic or minority educational institution
will also receive the same. Of course, the state cannot be compelled to grant
aid, but the receipt of aid cannot be a reason for altering the nature of
character of the incipient educational institution.

143\. This means that the right under Article 30(1) implies that any grant
that is given by the state to the minority institution cannot have such
conditions attached to it, which will in any way dilute or abridge the rights
of the minority institution to establish and administer that institution. The
conditions that can normally be permitted to be imposed, on the educational
institutions receiving the grant, must be related to the proper utilization of
the grant and fulfillment of the objectives of the grant. Any such secular
conditions so laid, such as a proper audit with regard to the utilization of
the funds and the manner in which the funds are to be utilized, will be
applicable and would not dilute the minority status of the educational
institutions. Such conditions would be valid if they are also imposed on other
educational institutions receiving the grant.

144\. It cannot be argued that no conditions can be imposed while giving aid
to a minority institution. Whether it is an institution run by the majority or
the minority, all conditions that have relevance to the proper utilization of
the grant-in-aid by an educational institution can be imposed. All that
Article 30(2) states is that on the ground that an institution is under the
management of a minority, whether based on religion or language, grant of aid
to that educational institution cannot be discriminated against, if other
educational institutions are entitled to received aid. The conditions for
grant or non-grant of aid to educational institutions have to be uniformly
applied, whether it is a majority-run institution or a minority-run
institution. As in the case of a majority-run institution, the moment a
minority institution obtains a grant of aid, Article 28 of the Constitution
comes into play. When an educational institution is maintained out of State
funds, no religious institution can be provided therein. Article 28(1) does
not state that it applies only to educational institutions that are not
established or maintained by religious or linguistic minorities. Furthermore,
upon the receipt of aid, the provisions of Article 28(3) would apply to all
educational institutions whether run by the minorities or the non-minorities.
Article 28(3) is the right of a person studying in a state recognized
institution or in an educational institution receiving aid from state funds,
not to take part in any religious instruction, if imparted by such
institution, without his/her consent (or his/her guardian's consent if such a
person is a minor). Just as Article 28(1) and (3) become applicable the moment
any educational institution takes aid, likewise, Article 29(2) would also be
attracted and become applicable to an educational institution maintained by
the state or receiving aid out of state funds. It was strenuously contended
that the right to give admission is one of the essential ingredients of the
right to administer conferred on the religious or linguistic minority, and
that this right should not be curtailed in any manner. It is difficult to
accept this contention. If Article 23(1) and (3) apply to a minority
institution that receives aid out of state funds, there is nothing in the
language of Article 30 that would make the provisions of Article 29(2)
inapplicable. Like Article 28(1) and Article 28(3), Article 29(2) refers to
"any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of
State funds". A minority institution would fall within the ambit of Article
29(2) in the same manner in which Article 28(1) and Article 28(3) would be
applicable to an aided minority institution. it is true that one of the rights
to administer an educational institution is to grant admission to the
students. As long as an educational institution, whether belonging to the
minority or the majority community, does not receive aid, it would, in our
opinion, be its right and discretion to grant admission to such students as it
chooses or selects subject to what has been clarified before. Out of the
various rights that the minority institution has in the administration of the
institution, Article 29(2) curtails the right to grant admission to a certain
extent. By virtue of Article 29(2), no citizen can be denied admission by an
aided minority institution on the grounds only of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them. It is no doubt true that Article 29(2) does curtail
one of the powers of the minority institution, but on receiving aid, some of
the rights that an unaided minority institution has are also curtailed by
Article 28(1) and 28(3). A minority educational institution has a right to
impart religious instruction - this right is taken away by Article 28(1), if
that minority institution is maintained wholly out of state funds. Similarly
on receiving aid out of state funds or on being recognized by the state, the
absolute right of a minority institution requiring a student to attend
religious instruction is curtailed by Article 28(3). If the curtailment of the
right to administer a minority institution on receiving aid or being wholly
maintained out of state funds as provided by Article 28 is valid, there is no
reason why Article 29(2) should not be held to be applicable. There is nothing
in the language of Article 28(1) and (3), Article 29(2) and Article 30 to
suggest that on receiving aid, Article 28(1) and (3) will apply, but Article
29(2) will not. Therefore, the contention that the institutions covered by
Article 30 are outside the injunction of Article 29(2) cannot be accepted.

145\. What is the true scope and effect of Article 29(2)? Article 29(2) is
capable of two interpretations--one interpretation, which is put forth by the
Solicitor General and the other counsel for the different States, is that a
minority institution receiving aid cannot deny admission to any citizen on the
grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. In other words, the
minority institution, once it takes any aid, cannot make any reservation for
its own community or show a preference at the time of admission, i.e., if the
educational institution was a private unaided minority institution, it is free
to admit all students of its own community, but once aid is received, Article
29(2) makes it obligatory on the institution not to deny admission to a
citizen just because he does not belong to the minority community that has
established the institution.

146\. The other interpretation that is put forth is that Article 29(2) is a
protection against discrimination on the ground of religion, race, caste or
language, and does not in any way come into play where the minority
institution prefers students of its choice. To put it differently, denying
admission, even though seats are available, on the ground of the applicant's
religion, race, caste or language, is prohibited, but preferring students of
minority groups does not violate Article 29(2).

147\. It is relevant to note that though Article 29 carries the head note
"Protection of interests of minorities" it does not use the expression
"minorities" in its text. The original proposal of the Advisory Committee in
the Constituent Assembly recommended the following:- ""(1) Minorities in every
unit shall be protected in respect of their language, script and culture and
no laws or regulations may be enacted that may operate oppressively or
prejudicially in this respect" [B. Siva Rao, "Select Documents" (1957) Vol. 2
page 281] But after the clause was considered by the drafting Committee on 1st
November, 1947, it emerged with substitute of 'section of citizen'. [B. Siva
Rao, Select Documents (1957) Vol. 3, pages 525-26. Clause 23, Draft
Constitution]. It was explained that the intention had always been to use
'minority' in a wide sense, so as to include (for example) Maharashtrians who
settled in Bengal. (7 C.A.D. pages 922-23)"

148\. Both Articles 29 and 30 from a part of the fundamental rights Chapter in
Part III of the Constitution. Article 30 is confined to minorities, be it
religious or linguistic, and unlike Article 29(1), the right available under
the said Article cannot be availed by any section of citizens. The main
distinction between Article 29(1) and Article 30(1) is that in the former, the
right is confined to conservation of language, script or culture. As was
observed in the Father W. Proost case, the right given by Article 29(1) is
fortified by Article 30(1), insofar as minorities are concerned. In the St.
Xaviers College case, it was held that the right to establish an educational
institution is not confined to conservation of language, script or culture.
When constitutional provisions are interpreted, it has to be borne in mind
that the interpretation should be such as to further the object of their
incorporation. They cannot be read in isolation and have to be read
harmoniously to provide meaning and purpose. They cannot be interpreted in a
manner that renders another provision redundant. If necessary, a purposive and
harmonious interpretation should be given.

149\. Although the right to administer includes within it a right to grant
admission to students of their choice under Article 30(1), when such a
minority institution is granted the facility of receiving grant-in-aid,
Article 29(2) would apply, and necessarily, therefore, one of the right of
administration of the minorities would be eroded to some extent. Article 30(2)
is an injunction against the state not to discriminate against the minority
educational institution and prevent it from receiving aid on the ground that
the institution is under the management of a minority. While, therefore, a
minority educational institution receiving grant-in-aid would not be
completely outside the discipline of Article 29(2) of the Constitution by no
stretch of imagination can the rights guaranteed under Article 30(1) be
annihilated. It is this context that some interplay between Article 29(2) and
Article 30(1) is required. As observed quite aptly in St. Stephen's case "the
fact that Article 29(2) applies to minorities as well as non-minorities does
not mean that it was intended to nullify the special right guaranteed to
minorities in Article 30(1)." The word "only" used in Article 29(2) is of
considerable significance and has been used for some avowed purpose. Denying
admission to non-minorities for the purpose of accommodating minority students
to a reasonable extent will not be only on grounds of religion etc., but is
primarily meant to preserve the minority character of the institution and to
effectuate the guarantee under Article 30(1). The best possible way is to hold
that as long as the minority educational institution permits admission of
citizens belonging to the non-minority class to a reasonable extent based upon
merit, it will not be an infraction of Article 29(2), even though the
institution admits students of the minority group of its own choice for whom
the institution was meant. What would be a reasonable extent would depend upon
variable factors, and it may not be advisable to fix any specific percentage.
The situation would vary according to the type of institution and the nature
of education that is being imparted in the institution. Usually, at the school
level, although it may be possible to fill up all the seats with students of
the minority group, at the higher level, either in colleges or in technical
institutions, it may not be possible to fill up all the seats with the
students of the minority group. However, even if it is possible to fill up all
the seats with students of the minority group, the moment the institution is
granted aid, the institution will have to admit students of the non-minority
group to a reasonable extent, whereby the character of the institution is not
annihilated, and at the same time, the rights of the citizen engrafted under
Article 29(2) are not subverted. It is for this reason that a variable
percentage of admission of minority students depending on the type of
institution and education is desirable, and indeed, necessary, to promote the
constitutional guarantee enshrined in both Article 29(2) and Article 30.

150\. At this stage, it will be appropriate to refer to the following
observations of B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J., in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India and
Ors. [1992 Supp. (3) SCC 215] at page 657, paragraph 683, as follows:- "Before
we proceed to deal with the question, we may be permitted to make a few
observations: The questions arising herein are not only of great moment and
consequence, they are also extremely delicate and sensitive. They represent
complex problems of Indian society, wrapped and presented to us as
constitutional and legal questions. On some of these questions, the decisions
of this Court have not been uniform. They speak with more than one voice.
Several opposing points of view have been pressed upon us with equal force and
passion and quite often with great emotion. We recognize that these viewpoints
are held genuinely by the respective exponents. Each of them feels his own
point of view is the only right one. We cannot, however, agree with all of
them. We have to find--and we have tried our best to find--answers which
according to us are the right ones constitutionally and legally. Though, we
are sitting in a larger Bench, we have kept in mind the relevance and
significance of the principle of stare decisis. We are conscious of the fact
that in law certainty, consistency and continuity are highly desirable
features. Where a decision has stood the test of time and has never been
doubted, we have respected it--unless, of course, there are compelling and
strong reasons to depart from it. Where, however, such uniformity is not
found, we have tried to answer the question on principle keeping in mind the
scheme and goal of our Constitution and the material placed before us."

151\. The right of the aided minority institution to preferably admit students
of its community, when Article 29(2) was applicable, has been clarified by
this Court over a decade ago in the St. Stephen's College case. While
upholding the procedure for admitting students, this Court also held that
aided minority educational institutions were entitled to preferably admit
their community candidates so as to maintain the minority character of the
institution, and that the state may regulate the intake in this category with
due regard to the area that the institution was intended to serve, but that
this intake should not be more than 50% in any case. Thus, St. Stephen's
endeavoured to strike a balance between the two Articles. Though we accept the
ratio of St. Stephen's, which has held the field for over a decade, we have
compelling reservations in accepting the rigid percentage stipulated therein.
As Article 29 and Article 30 apply not only to institutions of higher
education but also to schools, a ceiling of 50% would not be proper. It will
be more appropriate that depending upon the level of the institution, whether
it be a primary or secondary or high school or a college, professional or
otherwise, and on the population and educational needs of the area in which
the institution is to be located the state properly balances the interests of
all by providing for such a percentage of students of the minority community
to be admitted, so as to adequately serve the interest of the community for
which the institution was established.

152\. At the same time, the admissions to aided institutions, whether awarded
to minority or non-minority students, cannot be at the absolute sweet will and
pleasure of the management of minority educational institutions. As the
regulations to promote academic excellence and standards do not encroach upon
the guaranteed rights under Article 30, the aided minority educational
institutions can be required to observe inter se merit amongst the eligible
minority applicants and passage of common entrance test by the candidates,
where there is one, with regard to admissions in professional and non-
professional colleges. If there is no such test, a rational method of
assessing comparative merit has to be evolved. As regards the non-minority
segment, admission may be on the basis of the common entrance test and
counselling by a state agency. In the courses for which such a test and
counselling are not in vogue, admission can be on the basis of relevant
criteria for the determination of merit. It would be open to the state
authorities to insist on allocating a certain percentage of seats to those
belonging to weaker sections of society, from amongst the non-minority seats.

153\. We would, however, like to clarify one important aspect at this stage.
The aided linguistic minority educational institution is given the right to
admit students belonging to the linguistic minority to a reasonable extent
only to ensure that its minority character is preserved and that the objective
of establishing the institution is not defeated. If so, such an institution is
under an obligation to admit the bulk of the students fitting into the
description of the minority community. Therefore, the students of that group
residing in the state in which the institution is located have to be
necessarily admitted in a large measure because they constitute the linguistic
minority group as far as that state is concerned. In other words, the
predominance of linguistic students hailing from the state in which the
minority educational institution is established should be present. The
management bodies of such institution cannot resort to the device of admitting
the linguistic students of the adjoining state in which they are in a
majority, under the facade of the protection given under Article 30(1). If
not, the very objective of conferring the preferential right of admission by
harmoniously constructing Articles 30(1) and 29(2), which we have done above,
may be distorted.

154\. We are rightly proud of being the largest democracy in the world. The
essential ingredient of democracy is the will and the right of the people to
elect their representatives from amongst a government is formed.

155\. It will be wrong to presume that the government or the legislature will
act against the Constitution or contrary to the public or national interest at
all times. Viewing every action of the government with skepticism, and with
the belief that it must be invalid unless proved otherwise, goes against the
democratic form of government. It is no doubt true that the Court has the
power and the function to see that no one including the government acts
contrary to the law, but the cardinal principle of our jurisprudence is that
it is for the person who alleges that the law has been violated to prove it to
be so. In such an event, the action of the government or the authority may
have to be carefully examined, but it is improper to proceed on the assumption
that, merely because an allegation is made, the action impugned or taken must
be bad in law. Such being the position, when the government frames rules and
regulations or lays down norms, specially with regard to eduction, one must
assume that unless shown otherwise, the action taken is in accordance with
law. Therefore, it will not be in order to so interpret a Constitution, and
Article 29 and 30 in particular, on the presumption that the state will
normally not act in the interest of the general public or in the interest of
concerned sections of the society.

CONCLUSION Equality and Secularism

156\. Our country is often depicted as a person in the form of "Bharat Mata

\-- Mother India". The people of India are regarded as her children with their
welfare being in her heart. Like and loving mother, the welfare of the family
is of paramount importance for her.

157\. For a healthy family, it is important that each member is strong and
healthy. But then, all members do not have the same constitution, whether
physical and/or mental. For harmonious and healthy growth, it is natural for
the parents, and the mother in particular, to give more attention and food to
the weaker child so as to help him/her become stronger. Giving extra food and
attention and ensuring private tuition to help in his/her studies will, in a
sense, amount to giving the weaker child preferential treatment. Just as
lending physical support to the aged and the infirm, or providing a special
diet, cannot be regarded as unfair or unjust, similarly, conferring certain
rights on a special class, for good reasons, cannot be considered inequitable.
All the people of India are not alike, and that is why preferential treatment
to a special section of the society is not frowned upon. Article 30 is a
special right conferred on the religious and linguistic minorities because of
their numerical handicap and to instill in them a sense of security and
confidence, even though the minorities cannot be per se regarded as weaker
sections or underprivileged segments of the society.

158\. The one billion population of India consists of six main ethnic groups
and fifty-two major tribes; six major religions and 6,400 castes and sub-
castes; eighteen major languages and 1,600 minor languages and dialects. The
essence of secularism in India can best be depicted if a relief map of India
is made in mosaic, where the aforesaid one billion people are the small pieces
of marble that go into the making of a map. Each person, whatever his/her
language, caste, religion has his/her individual identity, which has to be
preserved, so that when pieced together it goes to form a depiction with the
different geographical features of India. These small pieces of marble, in the
form of human beings, which may individually be dissimilar to each other, when
placed together in a systematic manner, produce the beautiful map of India.
Each piece, like a citizen of India, plays an important part in making of the
whole. The variations of the colours as well as different shades of the same
colour in a map is the result of these small pieces of different shades and
colours of marble, but even when one small piece of marble is removed, the
whole map of India would be scarred, and the beauty would be lost.

159\. Each of the people of India has an important place in the formation of
the nation. Each piece has to retain its own colour. By itself, it may be an
insignificant stone, but when placed in a proper manner, goes into the making
of a full picture of India in all its different colours and hues.

160\. A citizen of India stands in a similar position. The Constitution
recognizes the differences among the people of India, but it gives equal
importance to each of them, their differences notwithstanding, for only then
can there be a unified secular nation. Recognizing the need for the
preservation and retention of different pieces that go into the making of a
whole nation, the Constitution, while maintaining, inter alia, the basic
principle of equality, contains adequate provisions that ensure the
preservation of these different pieces.

161\. The essence of secularism in India is the recognition and preservation
of the different types of people, with diverse languages and different
beliefs, and placing them together so as to form a whole and united India.
Articles 29 and 30 do not more than seek to preserve the differences that
exist, and at the same time, unite the people to form one strong nation.

ANSWERS TO ELEVEN QUESTIONS:

Q.1. What is the meaning and content of the expression "minorities" in Article
30 of the Constitution of India?

A. Linguistic and religious minorities are covered by the expression
"minority" under Article 30 of the Constitution. Since reorganisation of the
State in India has been on linguistic lines, therefore, for the purpose of
determining the minority the unit will be the State and note the whole of
India. Thus, religious and linguistic minorities, who have been put at par in
Article 30, have to be considered State-wise.

Q.2. What is meant by the expression "religion" in Article 30(1)? Can the
followers of a sect or denomination of a particular religion claim protection
under Article 30(1) on the basis that they constitute a minority in the State,
even though the followers of that religion are in majority in that State?

A. This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by
a regular Bench.

Q.3(a) What are the indicia for treating an educational institution as a
minority educational institution? Would an institution be regarded as a
minority educational institution because it was established by a person(s)
belonging to a religious or linguistic minority or its being administered by a
person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic minority? A. This question
need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by a regular Bench.

Q3(b) To what extent can professional education be treated as a matter coming
under minorities rights under Article 30?

A. Article 30(1) gives religious and linguistic minorities the right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The use of
the words "of their choice" indicates that even professional educational
institutions would be covered by Article 30.

Q.4 Whether the admission of students to minority educational institution,
whether aided or unaided, can be regulated by the State Government or by the
University to which the institution is affiliated? A. Admission of students to
unaided minority educational institutions, viz., schools and undergraduates
colleges where the scope for merit-based selection is practically nil, cannot
be regulated by the concerned State or University, except for providing the
qualifications and minimum conditions of eligibility in the interest of
academic standards. The right to admit students being an essential facet of
the right to administer educational institutions of their choice, as
contemplated under Article 30 of the Constitution, the state government or the
university may not be entitled to interfere with that right, so long as the
admission to the unaided educational institutions is on a transparent basis
and the merit is adequately taken care of. The right to administer, not being
absolute, there could be regulatory measures for ensuring educational
standards and maintaining excellence thereof, and it is more so in the matter
of admissions to professional institutions.

A minority institution does not cease to be so, the moment grant-in-aid is
received by the institution. An aided minority educational institution,
therefore, would be entitled to have the right of admission of students
belonging to the minority group and at the same time, would be required to
admit a reasonable extent of non-minority students, so that the rights under
Article 30(1) are not substantially impaired and further the citizens rights
under Article 29(2) are not infringed. What would be a reasonable extent,
would vary from the types of institution, the courses of education for which
admission is being sought and other factors like educational needs. The
concerned State Government has to notify the percentage of the non-minority
students to be admitted in the light of the above observations. Observance of
inter se merit amongst the applicants belonging to the minority group could be
ensured. In the case of aided professional institutions, it can also be
stipulated that passing of the common entrance test held by the state agency
is necessary to seek admission. As regards non-minority students who are
eligible to seek admission for the remaining seats, admission should normally
be on the basis of the common entrance test held by the state agency followed
by counselling wherever it exists. Q5(a) Whether the minority's rights to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice will include
the procedure and method of admission and selection of students?

A. A minority institution may have its own procedure and method of admission
as well as selection of students, but such a procedure must be fair and
transparent, and the selection of students in professional and higher
education colleges should be on the basis of merit. The procedure adopted or
selection made should not tantamount to mal-administration. Even an unaided
minority institution ought not to ignore the merit of the students for
admission, while exercising its right to admit students to the colleges
aforesaid, as in that event, the institution will fail to achieve excellence.

Q5(b) Whether the minority institutions' right of admission of students and to
lay down procedure and method of admission, if any, would be affected in any
way by the receipt of State aid?

A. While giving aid to professional institutions, it would be permissible for
the authority giving aid to prescribe by-rules or regulations, the conditions
on the basis of which admission will be granted to different aided colleges by
virtue of merit, coupled with the reservation policy of the state qua non-
minority students. The merit may be determined either through a common
entrance test conducted by the concerned University or the Government followed
by counselling, or on the basis of an entrance test conducted by individual
institutions--the method to be followed is for the university or the
government to decide. The authority may also devise other means to ensure that
admission is granted to an aided professional institution on the basis of
merit. In the case of such institutions, it will be permissible for the
government or the university to provide that consideration should be shown to
the weaker sections of the society. Q5(c) Whether the statutory provisions
which regulate the facets of administration like control over educational
agencies, control over governing bodies, conditions of affiliation including
recognition/withdrawal thereof, and appointment of staff, employees, teachers
and Principal including their service conditions and regulation of fees, etc.
would interfere with the right of administration of minorities? A. So far as
the statutory provisions regulating the facets of administration are
concerned, in case of an unaided minority educational institution, the
regulatory measure of control should be minimal and the conditions of
recognition as well as the conditions of affiliation to an university or board
have to be complied with, but in the mater of day-to- day management like the
appointment of staff, teaching and non-teaching, and administrative control
over them, the management should have the freedom and there should not be any
external controlling agency. However, a rational procedure for the selection
of teaching staff and for taking disciplinary action has to be evolved by the
management itself. For redressing the grievances of employees of aided and
unaided institutions who are subjected to punishment or termination from
service, a mechanism will have to be evolved, and in our opinion, appropriate
tribunals could be constituted, and till then, such tribunals could be
presided over by a Judicial Officer of the rank of District Judge. The State
or other controlling authorities, however, can always prescribe the minimum
qualification, experience and other conditions bearing on the merit of an
individual for being appointed as a teacher or a principal of any educational
institution.

Regulations can be framed governing service conditions for teaching and other
staff for whom aid is provided by the state, without interfering with the
overall administrative control of the management over the staff. Fees to be
charged by unaided institutions cannot be regulated but no institution should
charge capitation fee.

Q6(a) Where can a minority institution be operationally located? Where a
religious or linguistic minority in State 'A" establishes an educational
institution in the said State, can such educational institution grant
preferential admission/reservations and other benefits to members of the
religious/linguistic group from other States where they are non-minorities? A.
This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by a
regular Bench.

Q6(b) Whether it would be correct to say that only the members of that
minority residing in State 'A' will be treated as the members of the minority
vis--vis such institution?

A. This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by
a regular Bench.

Q.7 Whether the member of a linguistic non-minority in one State can establish
a trust/society in another State and claim minority status in that State?

A. This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by
a regular Bench.

Q.8 Whether the ratio laid down by this Court in the St. Stephen's case ( St.
Stephen's College v. University of Delhi is correct? If no, what order? A. The
basic ratio laid down by this Court in the St. Stephen's College case is
correct, as indicated in this judgment. However, rigid percentage cannot be
stipulated. It has to be left to authorities to prescribe a reasonable
percentage having regard to the type of institution, population and
educational needs of minorities.

Q.9 Whether the decision of this Court in Unni Krishnan J.P. v. State of A.P.
(except where it holds that primary education is a fundamental right) and the
scheme framed thereunder required reconsideration/modification and if yes,
what?

A. The scheme framed by this Court in Unni Krishnan's case case and the
directio to impose the same, except where it holds that primary education is
fundamental right, is unconstitutional. However, the principle that the should
not be capitation fee or profiteering is correct. Reasonable surplus to meet
cost of expansion and augmentation of facilities does not, however, amount to
profiteering.

Q.10 Whether the non-minorities have the right to establish and administer
educational institution under Article 21 and 29(1) read with Articles 14 and
15(1), in the same manner and to the same extent as minority institutions? And
Q.11 What is the meaning of the expressions "Education" and "Educational
Institutions" in various provisions of the Constitution? Is the right to
establish and administer educational institutions guaranteed under the
Constitution?

A. The expression "education" in the Articles of the Constitution means and
includes education at all levels from the primary school level upto the post-
graduate level. It includes professional education. The expression
"educational institutions" means institutions that impart education, where
"education" is as understood hereinabove.

The right to establish and administer educational institutions is guaranteed
under the Constitution to all citizens under Articles 19(1)(g) and 26, to
minorities specifically under Article 30.

All citizens have a right to establish and administer educational institutions
under Articles 19(1)(g) and 26, but this right is subject to the provisions of
Articles 19(6) and 26(a). However, minority institutions will have a right to
admit students belonging to the minority group, in the manner as discussed in
this judgment.

___________________________________________________________________________
V.N. Khare, J.

162\. It is interesting to note that Shri K.M. Munshi, one of the members of
the Constituent Assembly while intervening in the debate in the Constituent
Assembly with regard to the kind of religious education to be given in
governmental aided institution stated thus:

"if the proposed amendment is accepted, the matter has to be taken to Supreme
Court and eleven worthy Judges have to decide whether the kind of education
given is of a particular religion or in the nature of elementary philosophy of
comparative religion. Then, after having decided that, the second point which
the learned Judges will have to direct their attention to will be whether this
elementary philosophy is calculated to broaden the minds of the pupils or to
narrow their minds. Then they will have to decide upon the scope of every
word, this being a justiciable right which has to be adjudicated upon by them.
I have no doubt members of my profession will be very glad to throw
considerable light on what is and is not a justiciable right of this nature (A
Member: For a fee). Yes, for very good fee too." (See -- Constitutional
Assembly Debates Official Report. Reprinted by Lok Sabha Secretariat)

163\. It may be noted that at the time when the Constituent Assembly was
framing the Constitution of India the strength of Judges of Supreme Court was
not contemplated as eleven Judges. It appears what Shri Munshi stated was
prophetic or a mere co-incidence. Today eleven Judges of the Supreme Court
have assembled to decide the question of rights of the minorities. Question
No. 1. What is the meaning and content of the expression of "minorities in
Article 30 of the Constitution of India?

164\. The first question that is required to be answered by this Bench is who
is a minority. The expression "minority" has been derived from the Latin word
"minor" and the suffix "ity" which means "small in number". According tot
Encyclopaedia Britannica 'minorities' means "groups held together by ties of
common descent, language or religious faith and feeling different in these
respects from the majority of the inhabitants of a given political entity".
J.A. Laponee in his book "The Protection to Minority" describes 'Minority' as
a group of persons having different race, language or religion from that of
majority of inhabitants. In the Year Book on Human Rights U.N. Publication
1950 ed. minority has been described as non dominant groups having different
religion or linguistic traditions than the majority population.

165\. The expression minority has not been defined in the Constitution. As a
matter of fact when Constitution was being drafted Shri T.T. Krishanamachari
one of the members of the Constituent Assembly proposed an amendment which
runs as under:

"That in Part XVI of the Constitution, for the word "minorities" where it
occurs, the word "certain classes" be substitued."

166\. We find that expression `minorities' has been employed only at four
places in the Constitution of India. Head note of Article 29 uses the word
minorities. Then again the expressions Minorities or minority have been
employed in head note of Article 30 and sub clauses (1) and (2) of Article

30\. However, omission to define minorities in the Constitution does not mean
that the employment of words `minorities' or `minority' in Article 30 is of
less significance. At this stage it may be noted that the expression
`minorities' has been used in Article 30 in two senses - one based on religion
and other on basis of language. However prior to coming into force of the
Constitution the expression minority was understood in terms of a class based
on religion having different electorates. When India attained freedom, the
framers of the Constitution threw away the idea of having separate electorates
based on religion and decided to have a system of joint electorates so that
every candidate in an election would have to seek support of all sections of
the constituency. In turn special safeguards were provided to minorities and
they were made part of Chapter III of the Constitution with a view to instill
a sense of confidence and security to the minorities.

167\. But the question arises what is the test to determine minority status
based on religion or language of a group of persons residing in a State or
Union Territory. Whether minority status of a given group of persons has to be
determined in relation to the population of the whole of India or population
of the State where the said group of persons is residing. When the
Constitution of India was being framed it was decided that India would be
Union of States and Constitution to be adopted would be of federal character.
India is a country where many ethnic or religious and multi language people
reside. Shri K.M. Munshi one of the members of Constituent Assembly in his
Note and Draft Article on (Right to Religion and Cultural Freedom) referred to
minorities as national minorities. The said draft Article VI (3) runs as
under:

"(3) Citizens belonging to national minorities in a State whether based on
religion or language have equal rights with other citizens in forming
controlling and administering at their own expense; charitable, religious and
social institutions, schools and other educational establishments with the
free use of their language and practice of their religions."

168\. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar while intervening in debate in regard to amendment to
draft Article 23 which related to the rights of religious and linguistic
minorities stated that "the term `minority' was used therein not in the
technical sense of the word minority as we have been accustomed to use it for
purposes of certain political safeguards, such as representation in the
legislature, representation in the services and so on". According to him, the
word minority is used not merely to indicate, the minority in technical sense
of the word, it is also used to cover minorities which are not minorities in
the technical sense but which are nonetheless minorities in the cultural and
linguistic sense. Dr. Ambedkar cited following example which runs as under:

"For instance, for the purposes of this Article 23, if a certain number of
people from Madras came and settled in Bombay for certain purposes, they would
be, although not a minority in the technical sense, cultural minorities.
Similarly, if a certain number of Maharashtrians went from Maharashtra and
settled in Bengal, although they may not be minorities in technical true
sense, they would be cultural and linguistic minorities in Bengal.

The Article intends to give protection in the matter of culture, language and
script not only to a minority technically, but also to a minority in the wider
sense of the term as I have explained just now. That is the reason why we
dropped the word minority because we felt that the word might be interpreted
in the narrow sense of the term when the intention of this House, when it
passed Article 18, was to use the word "minority" in a much wider sense, so as
to give cultural protection to those who were technically not minorities but
minorities nonetheless." (See Constitutional Assembly Debates Official Report
reprinted by Lok Sabha Secretariat)

169\. The draft article and the Constituent Assembly Debates in unambiguous
terms show that minority status of a group of persons has to be determined on
the basis of population of a State or Union Territory.

170\. Further a perusal of Articles 350A and 350B which were inserted by the
Constitution (7th Amendment) Act 1956 indicates that the status of linguistic
minorities has to be determined as state-wise linguistic minorities/groups.
Thus the intention of the framers of the Constitution and subsequent
amendments in the Constitution indicate that protection was conferred not only
to religious minorities but also to linguistic minorities on basis of their
number in a State (unit) where they intend to establish an institution of
their choice. It was not contemplated that status of linguistic minority has
to be judged on basis of population of the entire country. If the status of
linguistic minorities has to be determined on basis of the population of the
country, the benefit of Article 30 has to be extended to those who are in
majority in their own States.

171\. The question who are minorities arose for the first time in the case of
Kerala Education Bill case 1959 SCR P.995 at 1047-50. In the said decision it
was contended by the State of Kerala that in order to constitute a minority
who may claim protection of Article 30(1) persons or group of persons must
numerically be minority in the particular region in which the educational
institution in question is or is intended to be situated. Further according to
State of Kerala, Anglo-Indians or Christians or Muslims of that locality taken
as a unit, will not be a minority within the meaning of the Article and will
not, therefore, be entitled to establish and maintain educational institutions
of their choice in that locality, but if some of the members belonging to the
Anglo Indian or Christians community happen to reside in another ward of the
same municipality and their number be less than that of the members of other
communities residing there, then those numbers of Anglo-Indian or Christians
community will be a minority within the meaning of Article 30 and will be
entitled to establish and maintain educational institution of their choice in
that locality. Repelling the argument this Court held thus:-

"We need not however, on this occasion go further into the matter and enter
upon a discussion and express a final opinion as to whether education being a
State subject being item 11 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution subject only to the provisions of entries 62, 63, 64 and 66 of
List land entry 25 of List 111, the existence of a minority community should
in all circumstances and for purposes of all laws of that State be determined
on the basis of the population of the whole State or whether it should be
determined on the State basis only when the validity of a law extending to the
whole State is in question or whether it should be determined on the basis of
the population of a particular locality when the law under attack applies only
to that locality, for the Bill before us extends to the whole of the State of
Kerala and consequently the minority must be determined by reference to the
entire population of that State. By this test Christians, Muslims and Anglo-
Indians will certainly be minorities in the State of Kerala."

172\. In A.M. Patroni v. E.C. Kesavan it was held as this: "6. The contention
of the petitioners is that they have an exclusive right to administer the
institution under Article 30(1) of the Constitution and that the order of the
Director of Public Instruction constitutes violation of that right. Clause (1)
of Article 30 provides that all minorities, whether based on religion of
language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice; and clause (2) that the State shall not, in
granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational
institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority,
whether based on religion or language. The word "minority" is not defined in
the Constitution; and in the absence of any special definition we must hold
that any community, religious or linguistic, which is numerically less than
fifty per cent of the population of the State is entitled to the fundamental
right guaranteed by the article."

173\. The view that in a state where a group of persons having distinct
language is numerically less than fifty per cent of population of that state
are to be treated as linguistic minority was accepted by the Government of
India and implemented while determining the minority status of persons or
group of persons and the same is evident from the views expressed by
Government of India before the Special Rapporteur of the U.N. Sub- Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, when he was
collecting information relating to the study on the concept of Minority and
cope of the ICCPR 1966.

174\. The Special Rapporteur in his report "Study on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to Ethnic Religious and Linguistic Minorities" published by the
Centre for Human Rights. Geneva states on the interpretation of the term
"Minority" as thus:

"For the purposes of the study, an ethnic, religious or linguistic minority is
a group numerically smaller than the rest of the population of the State to
which it belongs and possessing cultural, physical or historical
characteristics, a religion or a language different from those of the rest of
the population."

175\. In the said report, views of the Government of India which was based on
decision of Kerala High Court in the case of A.M. Paatroni was referred to
which runs as under:

"(39) In India, the Kerala High Court, after observing that the Constitution
granted specific rights to minorities, declared that "in the absence of any
special definition we must hold that any community religious or linguistic,
which is numerically less than 50% of the population of the State is entitled
to the rights guaranteed by the Constitution".

176\. However in the case of D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab 1971 Suppl.
S.C.R. p.688 at 697, an argument was raised that minority status of a person
or group of persons either religious or linguistic is to be determined by
taking into consideration the entire population of the country. While dealing
with the said argument this Court held as follow: "Though, there was a faint
attempt to canvas the position that religious or linguistic minorities should
be minorities in relation to the entire population of the country, in our view
they are to be determined only in relation to the particular legislation which
is sought to be impugned, namely that if it is the State legislature these
minorities have to be determined in relation to the population of the State".

177\. It may be noted that in the case of D.A.V.College (supra), this Court
was dealing with the State legislation and in that context observed that if it
is the state legislation, minority status has to be determined in relation to
the population of the State. However, curiously enough, there is no discussion
that if the particular legislation sought to be impugned is a central
legislation, minority status has to be tested in relation to the population of
the whole of the country. In the absence of any such discussion it cannot be
inferred that if there is a central legislation, the minority status of a
group of persons has to be determined in relation to the entire population of
the country.

178\. In the year 1976 by Fourty-Second Amendment Act, the Entries 11 and 25
of List II of Seventh Schedule relating to Education and Vocational and
Technical Training Labour respectively were transferred to the Concurrent List
as Entry No. 25. In the Constitution of India as enacted Entries 11 and 25 of
List II were as under:

Entry 11 "Education including Universities subject to the provisions of
Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III".

Entry 25 "Vocational or Technical training of labour".

179\. By the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 Entry 25 of List III was
substituted by the following entry viz:

Entry 25 "Education including technical education, medical education and
universities subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I;
vocational and technical training of Labour".

And Entry 11 of List II was omitted.

180\. On 6.2.1997 when these matters came up before a Bench of seven Judges of
this court, the Bench passed an order which runs as under: "In view of the
42nd Amendment to the Constitution placing with effect from 3.1.1977 the
subject "Education in Entry 25 List III of the 7th Schedule to the
Constitution and the quoted decisions of the Larger Benches of this Court
being of the pre amendment era, the answer to the brooding question, as to who
in the context constitutes a minority, has become one of the utmost
significance and therefore, it is appropriate that these matters are placed
before a Bench of at least 11 Hon'ble Judges for determining the questions
involved".

181\. It is for the aforesaid reasons this question has been placed before
this Bench.

182\. In view of the referring order the question that arises for
consideration is whether the transposition of the subject Education from List
II to List III has brought change to the test determining who are minorities
for the purposes of Article 30 of the Constitution.

183\. It may be remembered that various entries in three lists of the Seventh
Schedule are not powers of legislation but field of legislation. These entries
are mere legislative heads and demarcate the area over which the appropriate
legislatures are empowered to enact law. The power to legislate is given to
the appropriate legislature by Article 246 and other articles. Article 245
provides that subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament may
make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India and the
legislature of a State may make laws for whole or any part of the State. Under
Article 246 Parliament has exclusive power to make law with respect to any of
the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule. Further under clause
(2) of Article 246 Parliament and subject to clause (1) the legislature of any
State are empowered to make law with respect to any of the matters enumerated
in List III Seventh Schedule and under clause (3) of Article 246, the
legislature of any State is empowered to enact law with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule subject to clauses (1)
and (2). From the aforesaid provisions it is clear that it is Article 246 and
other Articles which either empower Parliament or State Legislature to enact
law and not the Entries finding place in three Lists of Seventh Schedule. Thus
the function of entries in three lists of the Seventh Schedule is to demarcate
the area over which the appropriate legislatures can enact laws but do not
confer power either on Parliament or State Legislatures to enact laws. It may
be remembered, by transfer of Entries, the character of entries is not lost or
destroyed. In this view of the matter by transfer of contents of entry 11 of
List II to List III as entry 25 has not denuded the power of State Legislature
to enact law on the subject `Education' but has also conferred power on
Parliament to enact law on the subject "Education". Article 30 confers
fundamental right to linguistic and religious minorities to establish and
administer educational institutions of their choice. The test who are
linguistic or religious minorities within the meaning of Article 30 would be
one and the same either in relation to a State legislation or Central
legislation. There cannot be two tests one in relation to Central legislation
and other in relation to State legislation. Therefore, the meaning assigned to
linguistic or religious minorities would not be different when the subject
"Education" has been transferred to the Concurrent List from the State List.
The test who are linguistic or religious minorities as settled in Kerala
Education Bill's case continues to hold good even after the subject
"Education" was transposed into Entry 25 List III of Seventh Schedule by the
42nd Amendment Act. If we give different meaning to the expression "minority"
occurring in Article 30 in relation to a central legislation, the very purpose
for which protection has been given to minority would disappear. The matter
can be examined from another angle. It is not disputed that there can be only
one test for determining minority status of either linguistic or religious
minority. It is, therefore, not permissible to argue that the test to
determine the status of linguistic minority would be different than the
religious minorities. If it is not so, each linguistic State would claim
protection of Article 30 in its own State in relation to a central legislation
which was not the intention of framers of the Constitution nor the same is
borne out from language of Article 30. I am, therefore, of the view that the
test for determining who are the minority, either linguistic or religious, has
to be determined independently of which is the law, Central or State.

184\. In view of what has been stated above, my conclusion on the question who
are minorities either religious or linguistic within the meaning of Article 30
is as follows:

The person or persons establishing an educational institution who belong to
either religious or linguistic group who are less than fifty per cent of total
population of the state in which educational institutional is established
would be linguistic or religious minorities. Conflict between ARTICLE 29(2)
AND ARTICLE 30(1) - whether Article 30(1) is subject to Article 29(2). What
are the contents of Article 30(1)?

185\. The issue in hand is full of complexities and an answer is not simple.
Under Article 30(1), linguistic or religious minorities' fundamental rights to
establish and administer educational institution of their choice have been
protected. Such institutions are of three categories. First category of
institutions are the institutions which neither take government aid nor are
recognised by the State or by the University. Second category of institutions
are those which do not take financial assistance from the government but seek
recognition either from the State or the University or bodies recognised by
the government for that purpose and the third category of institutions which
seek both government aid as well as recognition from the State or the
University.

186\. Here, I am concerned with the third category of minority institutions
and my answer to the question is confined to the said category of minority
educational institutions.

187\. It is urged on behalf of the minority institutions that Article 30(1)
confers an absolute right on linguistic or religious minorities to establish
and administer educational institutions of their choice. According to them,
the expression `choice' indicates that one of the purposes of establishing
educational institutions is to give secular education to the children of
minority communities and, therefore, such institutions are not precluded from
denying admission to members of non- minority communities on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them. In nutshell, the argument is
that Article 30(1) is not subject to Article 29(2). Whereas, the argument of
learned Solicitor General and other learned counsel is that any minority
institution receiving government aid is bound by the mandate of Article 29(2)
and such a minority institution cannot discriminate between the minority and
majority while admitting students in such institutions. According to them,
Article 30(1) does not confer an absolute right on the institutions set up by
the linguistic or religious minorities receiving government aid and such
institutions cannot extend preference to the members of their own community in
the matter of admission of students in the institutions.

188\. The question, therefore, arises whether minority institutions receiving
government aid are subject to provisions of Article 29(2).

189\. Learned counsel for the parties has pressed into service various rules
of constructions for interpreting Article 29(2) and Article 30(1) in their own
way. No doubt, various rules of construction laid down by the courts have been
of considerable assistance as they are based on human experience. The
precedents show that by taking assistance from rule of interpretations, the
courts have solved many problems. We, therefore, propose to take assistance of
judicial decisions as well as settled rules of interpretation while
interpreting Articles 29(2) and 30(1) of the Constitution.

190\. After the Constitution of India came into force, Articles 29 and 30 came
up for interpretation before various High Courts and the Apex Court. There
appears to be no unanimity amongst the judicial decisions rendered by the
courts as regards the extent of right conferred by Article 30(1). One line of
decisions is that minority institutions receiving government aid are bound by
constitutional mandate enshrined in article 29(2). The second line of
decisions is that minority institutions receiving government aid while
admitting students from their own communities in the institutions established
by them are free to admit students from other communities -- belonging to
majority, and such admission of students in the institution do not destroy the
minority character of the institution. The third line of decisions is that
under Article 30(1) fundamental right declared in terms is absolute although
it was not decided whether Article 30(1) is subject to Article 29(2) or not.
However, the view in the said decisions is that the right conferred under
Article 30(1) is an absolute right. The fourth line of decision is that there
can be no communal reservation for admission in Govt. or government aided
institutions. The aforesaid categories of decisions shall hereinafter be
referred to as first, second, third and fourth category of decisions.

191\. The first decision in first category of decisions of this Court is The
State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society & Ors. In this case, a Society
consisting of members of Anglo-Indian community whose mother tongue was
English set up an institution in the then State of Bombay. The State of Bombay
in the year 1955 issued an Order that no school shall admit to class where
English is used as a medium of instruction any pupil other than a pupil
belonging to a section of citizens the language of which is English namely,
Anglo-Indians and citizens of non- Asiatic descent. One of the members of the
Christian community sought admission in the school on the premise that his
mother tongue was English. He was refused admission in view of the aforesaid
Government Order, as the student was neither an Anglo-Indian whose mother
tongue was English nor a citizen of non-Asiatic descent. This was challenged
by means of a petition under Article 226 before the Bombay High Court and the
Govt. order was struck down. On appeal to the Apex Court, this Court held
thus:

"Article 29(1) gives protection to any section of the citizens having a
distinct language, script or culture by guaranteeing their right to conserve
the same. Article 30(1) secures to all minorities whether based on religion or
language, the right to establish and administer educational institutions of
their choice. Now, suppose the State maintains an educational institution to
help conserving the distinct language, script or culture of a section of the
citizens or makes grants-in-aid of an educational institution established by a
minority community based on religion or language to conserve their distinct
language, script or culture who can claim the protection of Article 29(2) in
the matter of admission into any such institution.? Surely, the citizens of
the very section whose language, script or culture is sought to be conserved
by the institution or the citizen who belonged to the minority group which has
established and is administering the institution, do not need any protection
against themselves and therefore, Article 29(2) is not designed for the
protection of this section or this minority. Nor do we see any reason to limit
article 29(2) to citizens belonging to a minority group other than the section
or the minorities referred to in article 29(1) or article 30(1), for the
citizens, who do not belong to any minority group, may quite conceivably need
this protection just as much as the citizens of such other minority groups. If
it is urged that the citizens of the majority group are amply protected by
article 15 and do not require the protection of article 29(2), then there are
several obvious answers to that argument. The language of article 29(2) is
wide and unqualified and may well cover all citizens whether they belong to
the majority or minority group. Article 15 protects all citizens against the
State whereas the protection of article 29(2) extents against the State or any
body who denies the right conferred by it. Further article 15 protects all
citizens against discrimination generally, but article 29(2) is a protection
against a particular species of wrong namely denial of admission into
educational institutions of the specified kind. In the next place article 15
is quite general and wide in its terms and applies to all citizens, whether
they belong to the majority or minority groups, and gives protection to all
the citizens against discrimination by the State on certain specific grounds.
Article 29(2) confers a special right on citizens for admission into
educational institutions maintained or aided by the State. To limit this right
only to citizens belonging to minority groups will be to provide a double
protection for such citizens and to hold that the citizens of the majority
group have no special educational rights in the nature of a right to be
admitted into an educational institution for the maintenance of which they
make contributions by way of taxes. We see no cogent reason for such
discrimination.

(emphasis supplied)

192\. In Re Kerala Education Bill, 1957 - 1959 SCR 995, it was held thus:
"Under clause (1) of Article 29 any section of the citizens residing in the
territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or
culture of its own has the right to conserve the same. It is obvious that a
minority community can effectively conserve its language, script or culture by
and through educational institutions and, therefore, the right to establish
and maintain educational institutions of its choice is a necessary concomitant
to the right to conserve its distinctive language, script or culture and that
is what is conferred on all minorities by Article 30(1) which has hereinbefore
been quoted in full. This right however, is subject to clause 2 of Article 29
which provides that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational
institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them."

(emphasis supplied)

193\. After holding that Article 30(1) is subject to clause (2) of Article 29,
this Court further held thus:

"There is no such limitation in Article 30(1) and to accept this limitation
will necessarily involve the addition of the words "for their own community"
in the Article which is ordinarily not permissible according to well
established rules of interpretation. Nor is it reasonable to assume that the
purpose of Article 29(2) was to deprive minority educational institutions of
the aid they receive from the State. To say that an institution which receives
aid on account of its being a minority educational institution must not refuse
to admit any member of any other community only on the grounds therein
mentioned and then to say that as soon as such institution admits such an
outsider it will cease to be a minority institution is tantamount to saying
that minority institutions will not, as minority institutions, be entitled to
any aid. The real import of Article 29(2) and Article 30(1) seems to us to be
that they clearly contemplate a minority institution with a sprinkling of
outsiders admitted into it. By admitting a non- member into it the minority
institution does not shed its character and cease to be a minority
institution." (emphasis supplied)

194\. In D.A.V. College etc. v. Punjab State & Ors. 1971 (suppl.) S.C.R. p.688
it was held thus:

"A reading of these two Articles together would lead us to conclude that a
religious or linguistic minority has a right to establish and administer
educational institutions of its choice for effectively conserving its
distinctive language, script or culture, which right however is subject to the
regulatory power of the State for maintaining and facilitating the excellence
of its standards. This right is further subject to clause (2) of Article 29
which provides that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational
institution which is maintained by the State or receives aid out of State
funds. on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
While this is so these two articles are not inter-linked nor does it permit of
their being always read together."

195\. In St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, Shetty J. speaking for
the majority held that Article 29(2) applies to minority as well as non-
minority institutions.

196\. From the decisions referred to above, the principles that emerge are
these:

(1) Article 29(2) confers right on the citizens for admission into educational
institution maintained or aided by the State without discrimination. To limit
this right only to citizens belonging to minority group will be to provide
double protection for such citizens and to hold that citizens of the majority
group have no special educational rights in the nature of a right to be
admitted into an educational institution for maintenance of which they make
contribution by way of taxes. There is no reason for such discrimination;

(2) Article 30(1) is subject to Article 29(2); and (3) the real import of
Articles 29(2) and 30(1) is that they clearly contemplate minority
institutions with the sprinkling of the outsiders admitted into it and by
admitting the non- minority into it, the minority institutions do not shed its
character and cease to be minority institutions.

197\. The first decision in the second category of cases is in Fev. Father W.
Proost & Ors. v. The State of Bihar & Ors. It was held therein that the right
of minority to establish educational institutions of their choice under
Article 30(1) is not so limited as not to admit members of other communities.
Such minority institutions while admitting members from their own community
are free to admit members of non-minority communities. The expression `choice'
includes to admit members from other communities. In the State of Kerala etc.
v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial etc. - 1971(1) SCR 734, it was held that it is
permissible that a minority institution while admitting students from its
community may also admit students from majority community. Admission of such
non- minority students would bring income and the institution need not be
turned away to enjoy the protection.

198\. The legal principle that emerges from the aforesaid decisions is that a
minority institution while admitting members from its own community is free to
admit students from non-minority community also.

199\. The first decision in the third category of cases is Rev. Sidhajbhai
Sabhai & Ors. v. State of Bombay & Anr.. In the said decision. although the
question as to whether Article 30(1) is subject to Article 29(2) was not
considered, yet it was held that under Article 30(1) fundamental right
declared in terms absolute. It was also held that unlike fundamental freedoms
guaranteed under Article 19 it is not subject to reasonable restrictions. It
is intended to be a real right for the protection of minorities in the matter
of setting up of educational institutions of their own choice. The right is
intended to be effective and not to be whittled down by so-called regulatory
measures conceived in the interest not of the minority educational
institution, but of the public or the nation as a whole.

200\. In Rt. Rev. Magr. Mark Netto v. Government of Kerala & ors., a question
arose whether Regional Deputy Director of Public Instructions can refuse
permission to a minority institution to admit girl students. This Court while
held that refusal to grant permission was violative of Article 30(1).

201\. The legal principles that emerges from the aforesaid category of
decisions are these:

(1) that article 30(1) is absolute in terms and the said right cannot be
whittled by down regulatory measures conceived in the interest not of minority
institutions but of public or the nation as a whole; and (2) the power of
refusal to admit a girl student in a boy's minority institution is violative
of Article 30(1).

202\. The fourth category of cases is the decision in the State of Madras v.
Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan etc. 1951 SCR 525 wherein it was held thus:
"This Court in the context of communal reservation of seats in medical
colleges run by the government was of the view that the intention of the
Constitution was not to introduce communal consideration in matters of
admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds. However, it may be noted that this case was
in relation to an institution referred to in Article 30(1) but has been cited
for the purpose that there cannot be communal reservation in the educational
institution receiving aid out of State funds." (emphasis supplied)

203\. From the aforesaid four categories of decisions, it appears that there
is not a single decision of this Court where it has been held that Article
30(1) is not subject to Article 29(2). On the contrary there are bulk of
decisions of this Court holding that minority institution cannot refuse
admission of members of non-minority community and Article 30(1) is subject to
Article 29(2). If I go by precedent, it must be held that Article 30(1) is
subject to Article 29(2). However, learned counsel for minority institutions
strongly relied upon the decision in the case of Rev. Sidhajbai (supra) and
argued that once Article 30(1) is fundamental right declared absolute in
terms, it cannot be subjected to Article 29(2). Since this Bench is of eleven
Judges and decisions of this Court holding that Article 30(1) is subject to
Article 29(2) are by lesser number of Judges I shall examine the question
independently.

204\. One of the known methods to interpret a provision of an enactment of the
Constitution is to look into the historical facts or any document preceding
the legislation.

205\. Earlier, to interpret a provision of the enactment or the Constitution
on the basis of historical facts or any document preceding the legislation was
very much frowned upon, but by passage of time, such injunction has been
relaxed.

206\. In His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru etc. v. State of
Kerala & Anr. Etc. , it was held that the Constituent Assembly debates
although not conclusive, yet the intention of framers of the Constitution in
enacting provisions of the Constitution can throw light in ascertaining the
intention behind such provision.

207\. In R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay , it was held thus:

"Reports of the Committee which preceded the enactment of a legislation,
reports of Joint Parliament Committee, report of a commission set up for
collecting information leading to the enactment are permissible external aids
to construction. If the basic purpose underlying construction of legislation
is to ascertain the real intention of the Parliament, why should the aids
which Parliament availed of such as report of a Special Committee preceding
the enactment, existing state of Law, the environment necessitating enactment
of legislation, and the object sought to be achieved, be denied to Court whose
function is primarily to give effect to the real intention of the Parliament
in enacting the legislation. Such denial would deprive the Court of a
substantial and illuminating aid to construction.

The modern approach has to a considerable extent croded the exclusionary rule
even in England."

208\. Thus, the accepted view appears to be that the report of the Constituent
Assembly debates can legitimately be taken into consideration for construction
of the provisions of the Act or the Constitution. In that view of the matter,
it is necessary to look into the Constituent Assembly debates which led to
enacting Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution.

209\. The genesis of the provisions of Articles 29 and 30 needs to be looked
into in their two historical stages to focus them in their true perspective.
The first stage relates to pre-partition deliberations in the Committees and
Constituent Assembly and the second stage after the partition of the country.
On 27th of February, 1947, several Committees were formed for the purpose of
drafting Constitution of India and on the same day, the Advisory Committee
appointed a Sub-Committee on minorities with a view to submit its report with
regard to the rights of the minorities. Before the Fundamental Rights Sub-
Committee, Shri K.M. Munshi - one of its members wanted certain rights for
minorities being incorporated in the fundamental rights. He was advised by the
Fundamental Rights Committee that the said report regarding rights of
minorities may be placed before the Minority Sub- Committee. On April 16,
1947, Shri K.M. Munshi circulated a letter to the members of the Sub-Committee
on minorities recommending that certain fundamental rights of minorities be
incorporated in the Constitution. The recommendations contained in the said
letter run as under:

"1. All citizens are entitled to the use of their mother tongue and the script
thereof and to adopt, study or use any other language and script of his
choice.

2\. Citizens belonging to national minorities in a State whether based on
religion or language have equal rights with other citizens in forming,
controlling and administering at their own expense, charitable, religious and
social institutions, schools and other educational establishment with the free
use of their language and practice of their religion. (emphasis supplied)

3\. Religious instruction shall not be compulsory for a member of a community
which does not profess such religion.

4\. It shall be the duty of every unit to provide in the public educational
system in towns and districts in which a considerable proportion of citizens
of other than the language of the unit are residents, adequate facilities for
ensuring that in the primary schools the instruction shall be given to the
children of such citizens through the medium of their own language.

Nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the unit from making the
teaching of the national language in the variant and script of the choice of
the pupil obligatory in the schools.

5\. No legislation providing state aid for schools shall discriminate against
schools under the management of minorities whether based on religion or
language.

6\. (a) Notwithstanding any custom or usage or prescription, all Hindus
without any distinction of caste or denomination shall have the right of
access to and worship in all public Hindu temples, choultries, dharmasalas,
bathing ghats, and other religious places.

(b) Rules of personal purity and conducted prescribed for admission to and
worship in these religious places shall in no way discriminate against or
impose any disability on any person on the ground that he belongs to impure or
inferior caste or menial class.

210\. One of the reasons for recommendation of the aforesaid rights was the
Polish Treaty forming part of Poland's Constitution which was a reaction to an
attempt in Europe and elsewhere to prevent minorities from using or studying
their own language. The aforesaid recommendations were then placed before the
Minority Sub-Committee. The Minority Sub-Committee submitted its report
amongst other subjects on cultural, educational and fundamental rights of
minorities which may be incorporated at the appropriate places in the
Constitution of India. The recommendations of the said Sub-Committee were
these:

(i) All citizens are entitled to use their mother tongue and the scrip
thereof, and to adopt, study or use any other language and script of their
choice;

(ii) Minorities in every unit shall be adequately protected in respect of
their language and culture, and no government may enact any laws or
regulations that may act oppressively or prejudicially in this respect;

(iii) No minority whether of religion, community or language shall be deprived
of its rights or discriminated against in regard to the admission into State
educational institutions, nor shall any religious instruction be compulsorily
imposed on them;

(iv) All minorities whether of religion, community or language shall be free
in any unit to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice and they shall be entitled to State aid in the same manner and measure
as is given to similar State-aided institutions;

(v) Notwithstanding any custom, law, decree or usage, presumption or terms of
dedication, no Hindu on grounds of caste, birth or denomination shall be
precluded from entering in educational institutions dedicated or intended for
the use of the Hindu community or any section thereof;

(vi) No disqualification shall arise on account of sex in respect of public
serve or professions or admission to educational institutions save and except
that this shall not prevent the establishment of separate educational
institutions for boys and girls."

211\. Initially, Shri G.B. Pant was of the view that these minority rights
should be made to form part of unjusticiable Directive Principles, but on
intervention of Shri K.M. Munshi those minority rights were included in the
fundamental rights chapter. On 22nd April, 1947, the report of Minority Sub-
Committee was placed before the Advisory Committee. The Advisory Committee,
inter alia, recommended that Clause 16 which corresponds to Article 28 of the
Constitution should be re-drafted as follows: "All persons are equally
entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise
and propagate religion subject order, morality or health, and to the other
provisions of this chapter."

212\. The Advisory Committee then considered the recommendations of the Sub-
Committee and it was resolved to insert the following clauses among the
justiciable fundamental rights:

"(1) Minorities in every unit shall be protected in respect of their language
script and culture, and no laws or regulations may be enacted that may operate
oppressively or prejudicially in this respect; (2) No minority whether based
on religion, community or language shall be discriminated against in regard to
the admission into State educational institutions, nor shall any religious
instruction be compulsorily imposed on them;

(3)(a) All minorities whether based on religion, community or language shall
be free in any unit to establish and administer educational institutions of
then choice;

(b) The State shall not while providing State aid to schools discriminate
against schools under the management of minorities whether based on religion,
community or language."

This became Clause 18.

213\. The recommendations of the Advisory Committee were then placed before
the Constituent Assembly which met on 1st May, 1947. When Clause 18 was moved
by Shri Sardar Vallabhabhai Patel for adoption by the House, several members
were of the view that Clause 18 may be referred back to the Advisory Committee
for reconsideration in the light of discussion that took place on that day.
However, Shri K.M. Munshi--another member of the Constituent Assembly
suggested that only Sub-clause (2) of Clause 18 be referred back to the
Advisory Committee for reconsideration. Ultimately, the amendment moved by
Shri K.M. Munshi was adopted and Sub-clause (2) of Clause 18 was referred back
to the Advisory Committee for reconsideration. Thereafter Clause 18(1) and
Clause 18(3) were accepted without any amendment.

214\. The Advisory Committee re-considered Clause 18(2) and recommended that
Clause 18(2) be retained after deleting the words "nor shall any religious
instruction be compulsorily imposed on them" as the said provision was already
covered by Clause 16. Thus, Sub-clause (2) was placed before the House on 30th
August, 1947 for being adopted along with the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee. When the matter was taken up Mrs. Purnima Banerji proposed the
following amendments that after the word 'State' the words 'and State-aided'
be inserted. While proposing the said amendment, Mrs. Banerji stated thus:

"The purpose of the amendment is that no minority, whether based on community
or religion shall be discriminated against in regard to the admission into
State-aided and State educational institutions. Many of the provinces, e.g.
U.P., have passed resolutions laying down that no educational institution will
forbid the entry of any members of any community merely on the ground that
they happened to belong to a particular community--even if that institution is
maintained by a donor who has specified that that institution should only
cater for members of his particular community. If that institution seeks State
aid, it must allow members of other communities to enter into it. In the olden
days, in the Anglo-Indian schools (it was laid down that though those schools
would be given to Indians. In the latest report adopted by this House it is
laid down at 40 per cent. I suggest Sir, that if this clause is included
without the amendment in the Fundamental Rights, it will be a step backward
and many provinces who have taken a step forward will have to retrace their
steps. We have many institutions conducted by very philanthropic people, who
have left large sums of money at their disposal. While we welcome such
donations, when a principle has been laid down that, if any institution
receives State aid, it cannot discriminate or refuse admission to members of
other communities, then it should be follow. We know, Sir, that many a
Province has got provincial feelings. If this provision is included as a
fundamental right, I suggest it will be highly detrimental. The Honourable
Mover has not told us what was the reason why he specifically excluded State-
aided institutions from this clause. If he had explained it, probably the
House would have been convinced. I hop that all the educationist and other
members of this House will support my amendment." (emphasis supplied)

215\. The amendment proposed by Mrs. Banerji was supported by Pandit Hirday
Nath Kunzra and other members. However, on intervention of Shri Vallabhbhai
Patel, the following Clause 18(2) as proposed by the Advisory Committee was
adopted:

"18(2). No minority whether based on religion, community or language shall be
discriminated against in regard to the admission into state educational
institutions."

216\. After Clause 18(2) was adopted by the Constituent Assembly, the same was
referred to the Constitution Drafting Committee of which Dr. B.R. Ambedkar was
the Chairman. The Drafting Committee while drafting Clause 18 deleted the word
'minority' from Clause 18(1) and the same was substituted by the words 'any
section of the citizens". However, rest of the clause as adopted by the
Constituent Assembly was retained. Clause 18(1), (2) and (3)

(a) & (b) were transposed in Article 23 of the Draft Constitution of India.
Article 23 of the Draft Constitution of India runs as under: Cultural and
Educational Rights "23. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the
territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script and
culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.

(2) No minority whether based on religion, community or language shall be
discriminated against in regard to the admission of any person belonging to
such minority into any educational institution maintained by the State. (3)
(a) All minorities whether based on religion, community or language shall have
the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice.

(b) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions,
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is
under the management of a minority, whether based on religion community or
language."

217\. On 8.12.1948, the aforesaid draft Article 23 was placed before the
Constituent Assembly. When draft Article 23 was taken up for debate, Shri M.
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar stated that for the words "no minority" occurring in
Clause 2 of draft Article 23, the words "no citizen or minority" be
substituted. He stated thus:

"I want that all citizens should have the right to enter any public
educational institution. This ought not to be confined to minorities. That is
the object with which I have moved this amendment."

218\. It is at that stage, Shri Thakur Dass Bhargava moved amendment No. 26 to
amendment No. 687. According to him, for amendment No. 687 of the List of
amendment, the following be substituted:

"No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion race, caste, language or any of them."

219\. He further stated thus:

"Sir, I find there are three points of difference between this amendment and
the provisions of the section which it seeks to amend. The first is to put in
the words 'no citizen' for the words 'no minority'. Secondly that not only the
institutions which are maintained by the State will be included in it, but
also such institutions as are receiving aid out of state funds. Thirdly, we
have, instead of the words "religion, community of language", the words,
"religion, race, caste, language or any of them." Now, Sir, it so happens that
the words "no minority" seek to differentiate the minority from the majority,
whereas you would be pleased to see that in the Chapter the words of the
heading are "cultural and educational rights", so that the minority rights as
such should not find any place under this Section. Now if we read Clause (2)
it would appear as if the minority had been given certain definite rights in
this clause, whereas the national interest requires that no majority also
should be discriminated again in this matter. Unfortunately, there is in some
matters a tendency that the minorities as such posses and are given certain
special rights which are denied to the majority. It was the habit of our
English masters that they wanted to create discriminations of this sort
between the minority and the majority. Sometimes the minority said they were
discriminated against and on the other occasions the majority felt the same
thing. The amendment brings the majority and the minority on an equal status.
In educational matters, I cannot understand, from the national point of view,
how any discrimination can be justified in favour of a minority or a majority.
Therefore, what this amendment seeks to do is that the majority and the
minority are brought on the same level. There will be no discrimination
between any member of the minority or majority in so far as admission to
educational institutions are concerned. So I should say that this is a charter
of the liberties for the student-world of the minority and the majority
communities equally.

Now, Sir, the word "community" is sought to be removed from this provision
because "community" has no meaning. If it is a fact that the existence of a
community is determined by some common characteristic and all communities are
covered by the words religion or language, then "community" as such has no
basis. So the word "community" is meaningless and the words substituted are
"race or caste". So this provision is so broadened that on the score of caste,
race, language or religion no discrimination can be allowed. My submission is
that considering the matter from all the standpoints, this amendment is one
which should be accepted unanimously by this House."

220\. After Dr. B.R. Ambedkar gave clarification as to why the words "no
minority" were deleted and its place "no section of the citizen" were
substituted in Clause (1) of Draft Article 23. Amendment as proposed by Shri
Thakur Dass Bhargava was put to motion and the same was adopted. Thus the word
'minority' was deleted and the same was substituted by the word 'citizen' and
for the words "religion, community or language", the words "religion, race,
caste, language or any of them were substituted. Thus, Article 23 was split
into two Articles-Article 23 containing Clause (1) and Clause (2) of Article
23 and Sub-clause (a) and (b) of Clause (3) of Article 23 was numbered as
Article 23-A. Subsequently Articles 23 and 23-A became Articles 29 and 30
respectively. Thus, Article 23, as amended, became part of the Constitution on
9th December, 1948.

221\. The deliberations of the Constituent Assembly show that initially Shri
K.M. Munshi recommended that citizens belonging to national minority in the
State whether based on religion or language have equal rights with other
citizens in setting up and administering at their own expense charitable,
religious and social institutions, schools and other educational
establishments with the free use of their language and practice of their
religion for being incorporated in the proposed Constitution of India. This
was with a view that the members of the majority community who are more in
number may not at any point of time take away the rights of minorities to
establish and administer educational institution of their choice. It was very
much clear that there was a clear intention that the rights given to
minorities under Article 30(1) were to be exercised by them if the institution
established is administered at their own cost and expense. It is for that
reason we find that no educational institution either minority or majority has
any common law right or fundamental right to receive financial assistance from
the government. Non-discriminatory Clause (2) of Article 30 only provides that
the State while giving grant-in-aid to the educational institutions shall not
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is
under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language. The
subsequent deliberations of the Constituent Assembly further shows that there
was thinking in the minds of the framers of the Constitution that equality and
secularism be given paramount importance while enacting Article 30(1). It is
evident that amendment proposed by Shri Thakur Dass Bhargava which is now
Article 29(2) was a conscious decision taken with due deliberations. The
Constituent Assembly was of the view that originally Clause (2) of draft
Article 23 sought to distinguish the minority from majority, whereas in the
chapter the words are 'cultural and educational rights' and as such the words
'minority' ought not to have found place in that Article. The reason for
omission of words in Clause (2) of draft Article 23 was that minorities were
earlier given certain rights under that clause where national interest
required that no member of majority also should be discriminated against in
educational matters. It also shows that by the aforesaid amendment
discrimination between minority and majority was done away with and the
amendment has brought the minority and majority in equal footing. The debate
also shows what was originally proposed either in Clause 18(2) or Article
23(2). The debate further shows that the post partition stage members of the
Constituent Assembly intended to broaden the scope of Clause (2) of draft
Article 23 and never wanted to confine the rights only to the minorities. The
views of the members of the Constituent Assembly were that if any institution
takes aid from the government for establishing and administering educational
institutions it cannot discriminate while admitting students on the ground of
religion, race and caste. It may be seen that by accepting the amendment
proposed by Shri Thakur Dass Bhargava the scope of Article 29(2) was broadened
inasmuch as the interest of minority - either religious or linguistic was
secured and, therefore, the intention of the framers of the Constitution for
enacting Clause (2) of Article 29(2) was that once a minority institution
takes government aid, it becomes subject to Clause (2) of Article 29.

222\. It was then urged that if the intention of the framers of the
Constitution was to make Article 30(1) subject to Article 29(2), the
appropriate place where it should have found place was Article 30(1) itself
rather than in Article 29 and, therefore, Article 29(2) cannot be treated as
an exception to Article 30(1). There is no merit in the contention. It is
earlier noticed that Clause (18) when was placed before the Constituent
Assembly contained the provisions of Article 29(1)(2) and 30(1)(2) and all
were numbered as Clause 18(1) (2) (3)(a) (b). Again when Clause (18) was
transposed in draft Article 23, Article 29(1)(2) and Article 30(1)(2)--both
were together in draft Article 23. Shri Thakur Dass Bhargava's amendment which
was accepted was in relation to Clause (2) of Article 23 which ultimately has
become Article 29(2). It is for that reason Article 29(2) finds place in
Article 29.

223\. It was also urged that if the framers of the Constitution intended to
carve out a exception to Article 30(1), they could have used the words
"subject to the provisions contained in Article 29(2)" in the beginning of
Article 30(1) or could have used the expression "notwithstanding" in the
beginning of Article 29(2) and in absence of such words it cannot be held that
Article 29(2) is an exception to Article 30(1). Reference in this regard was
made to Articles 25 and 26 which contained qualifying words. In fact, the
structural argument was based on the absence of qualifying words either in
Article 29(2) or 30(1). This argument based on structure of Articles 29(2) and
30(1) has no merit. In fact, it overlooks that the intention of the framers of
the Constitution was to confer rights consistent with the other members of
society and to promote rather than imperil national interest. it may be noted
that there is a difference in the language of Articles 25 and 26. The
qualifying words of Article 25 are "subject to public order, morality and
health and to the other provisions of this part". The opening words of Article
26 are "subject to public order, morality and health". The absence of words
"to the other provisions of this part" as occurring in Article 25 in Article
26 does not mean that Article 26 is over and above other rights conferred in
Part-III of the Constitution. In The Durgah Committee, Ajmer and Anr. v. Syed
Hussain Ali and Ors. -and Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj v. The State of
Rajasthan and Ors. -, it has been held that Article 26 is subject to Article
25 irrespective of the fact that the words "subject to other provisions of
this part" occurring in Article 25 is absent in Article 26. For these reasons,
it must be held that even if there are no qualifying expression "subject to
other provisions of this part" and "notwithstanding anything" either in
Article 30(1) or Article 29(2), Article 30(1) is subject to Article 29(2) of
the Constitution.

224\. There is another factor which shows that Article 30(1) is subject to
Article 29(2). If Article 29(2) is meant for the benefit of minority, there
was no sense in using the word 'caste' in Article 29(2). The word 'caste' is
unheard of in religious minority communities and, therefore, Article 29(2) was
never intended by the framers of the Constitution to confer any exclusive
rights to the minorities.

225\. Although Article 30(1) strictly may not be subject to reasonable
restrictions, it cannot be disputed that Article 30(1) is subject to Article
28(3) and also general laws and the laws made in the interests of national
security, public order, morality and the like governing such institutions will
have to be necessarily read into Article 30(1). In that view of the matter the
decision by this Court in Rev. Sidhajbhai (supra) that under Article 30(1)
fundamental right conferred on minorities is in terms absolute is not borne
out of that Article. It, therefore, cannot be held that the fundamental right
guaranteed under Article 30(1) is absolute in terms. Thus, looking into the
precedents, historical fact and Constituent Assembly debates and also
interpreting Articles 29(2) and 30(1) contextually and textually, the
irrestible conclusion is that Article 30(1) is subject to Article 29(2) of the
Constitution.

226\. The question then arises for what purpose the celebrated Article 30(1)
has been incorporated in the Constitution if the linguistic or religious
minorities who establish educational institutions cannot admit their own
students or are precluded from admitting members of their own communities in
their own institution. It is urged that the rights under Article 30(1)
conferred on the minorities was in return to minorities for giving up demand
for separate electorate system in the country. It is also urged that an
assurance was given to the minorities that they would have a fundamental right
to establish and administer educational institution of their choice and in
case the minority cannot admit their own students or members of their own
community it would be breach of the assurance given to the minorities. There
is no denial of the fact that in a democracy the rights and interest of
minorities have to be protected. In the year 1919, President Wilson stated
that nothing is more likely to disturb the peace of the world than the
treatment which might in certain circumstances be meted out to minorities.
Lord Acton emphasized that the most certain test by which we judge whether a
country is really free is the amount of security enjoyed by minorities. It is
also not disputed that in the field of international law in respect of
minorities it is an accepted view that the minorities on account of their non
dominance are in a vulnerable position in the society and in addition to the
guarantee of non-discrimination available to all the citizens, require special
and preferential treatment in their own institutions. The Sub-Committee in its
report to the Commission on Human Rights reported thus:

"Protection of minorities is the protection of non-dominant groups, which,
while wishing in general for equality of treatment with the minority, wish for
a measure of differential treatment in order to preserve basic characteristics
which they possess and which distinguish them from the majority of the
population. The protection applied equally to individuals belonging to such
groups and wishing the same protection. It follows that differential treatment
of such groups or of individuals belonging to such groups is justified when it
is exercised in the interest of their contentment and the welfare of the
community as a whole." (cited in St. Xavier's College)

227\. The aforesaid report was accepted by the Permanent Court of
International Justice in a case relating to minority school in Albania which
arose out of the fact that Albania signed a Declaration relating to the
position of minorities in the State. Article 4 of the Declaration provided
that all Albanian nationals shall be equal before the law and shall enjoy the
same civil and political rights without distinction as the race, language or
religion. Article 5 further provided that all Albanian nationals who belong to
racial, religious or linguistic minorities will enjoy the same treatment and
security in law and in fact as other Albanian nationals. In particular they
shall have an equal right to maintain, manage and control at their own expense
or to establish in the future charitable, religious and social institutions,
schools and other educational establishments with the right to use their own
language and to exercise their religion freely therein. Subsequently, the
Albanian Constitution was amended and a provision was made for compulsory
primary education for the Albanian nationals in State schools and all private
schools were to be closed. The question arose before the Permanent Court of
International Justice as to whether Albanian Government was right to abolish
the private schools run by the Albanian minorities. The Court was of the view
that the object of Declaration was to ensure that nationals belonging to the
racial, religious or linguistic minorities shall be placed in every respect on
a footing of perfect equality with other nationals of the State. The second
was to ensure for the minority elements suitable means for the preservation of
their racial peculiarities, their traditions and their national
characteristics. These two requirements were indeed closely interlocked, for
there would be no true equality between a majority and a minority if the
latter were deprived of its own institutions and were consequently compelled
to renounce that which constitutes the very essence of its being a minority.
The Court was of the further view that "there must be equality in fact as well
as ostensible legal equality in the sense of the absence of discrimination in
the words of the law. Equality in law precludes discrimination of any kind;
whereas equality in fact may involve the necessity of different treatment in
order to attain a result which establishes an equilibrium between different
situations." (St. Xavier Colleges case (per Khanna, Mathew, JJ.)

228\. Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
1966 (CCPR) guarantee minority rights in the following terms: "In those States
in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist persons belonging to
such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the other
members of their group, to enjoy their own culture to profess and practice
their own religions or to use their own language."

229\. Prof. Francesco Capotorti in his celebrated study on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to Ethnic, Religious or Linguistic Minorities stated as
follows:

"Article 27 of the Covenant must, therefore, be placed in its proper context.
To enable the objectives of this article to be achieved, it is essential that
States should adopt legislative and administrative measures. It is hard to
imagine how the culture and language of a group can be conserved without, for
example, a special adaptation of the educational system of the country. The
right accorded to members of minorities would quite obviously be purely
theoretical unless adequate cultural institutions were established. This
applies equally in the linguistic field, and even where the religion of a
minority is concerned a purely passive attitude on the part of the State would
not answer the purposes of Article 27. However, whatever the country, groups
with sufficient resources to carry out tasks of this magnitude are rare, if
not non-existent. Only the effective exercise of the rights set forth in
Article 27 can guarantee observance of the principle of the real, and not only
formal, equality of persons belonging to minority groups. The implementation
of these rights calls for active and sustained intervention by States. A
passive attitude on the part of the latter would render such rights
inoperative."

230\. The Human Rights Committee functioning under the Optional Protocol of
ICCPR in its General Comment adopted by the Committee on 06th April, 1994
stated thus:

"The Committee points out that Article 27 establishes and recognizes a right,
which is conferred on individuals belonging to minority groups and which is
distinct from, and additional to, all the other rights which, as individuals
in common with everyone else, they are already entitled to enjoy under the
Covenant."

231\. From the aforesaid report it is clear that in certain circumstances
rights conferred to minority groups are distinct from and additional to, all
the other rights which as an individuals are entitled to enjoy under the
covenant. The political thinkers have recognised the importance of minority
rights as well as for ensuring such rights. According to them the rights
conferred on linguistic or religious minorities are not in the nature of
privilege or concession, but heir entitlement flows from the doctrine of
equality, which is the real de facto equality. Equality in law precludes
discrimination of any kind, whereas equality in fact may involve the necessity
of different treatment in order to attain a result which establishes
equilibrium between different situations. Where there is a plurality in a
society, the object of law should be not to split the minority group which
makes up the society, but to find out political social and legal means of
preventing them from falling apart and so destroying the society of which they
are members. The attempt should be made to assimilate the minorities with
majority. It is a matter of common knowledge that in some of the democratic
countries where minority rights were not protected, those democracies acquired
status of theocratic States.

232\. In India, the framers of the Constitution of India with a view to
instill a sense of confidence and security in the mind of minority have
conferred rights to them under the Constitution. One of such rights is
embodied in Article 30 of the Constitution. Under Article 30 the minorities
either linguistic or religious have right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice. However, under the Constitution
every citizen is equal before law, either he may belong to minority group or
minority community. But right conferred on minority under Article 30(1) would
serve no purpose when they cannot admit students of their own community in
their own institutions. In order to make Article 30(1) workable and
meaningful, such rights must be interpreted in the manner in which they serve
the minorities as well as the mandate contained in Article 29(2). Thus, where
minorities are found to have established and administering their own
educational institutions, the doctrine of the real de facto equality has to be
applied. The doctrine of the real de facto equality envisages giving a
preferential treatment to members of minorities in the matter of admission in
their own institutions. On application of doctrine of the real de facto
equality in such a situation not only Article 30(1) would be workable and
meaningful, but it would also serve the mandate contained in Article 29(2).
Thus, while maintaining the rule of non- discrimination envisaged by Article
29(2), the minorities should have also right to give preference to the
students of their own community in the matter of admission in their own
institution. Otherwise, there would be no meaningful purpose of Article 30(1)
in the Constitution. True, receipt of State aid makes it obligatory for
educational institution to keep the institution open to non-minority students
without discrimination on the specified grounds. But, to hold that the receipt
of State aid completely disentitles the management of minority educational
institutions from admitting students of their community to any extent will be
to denude the essence of Article 30 of the Constitution. It is, therefore,
necessary that minority be given preferential rights to admit students of
their own community in their own institutions in a reasonable measure
otherwise there would be no meaningful purpose of Article 30 in the
Constitution.

233\. Article 337 of the Constitution provides that grants or government aid
has to be given to the Anglo-Indian Institution provided they admit 40% of
members from other community. Taking the clue from Article 337 and spirit
behind Article 30(1) it appears appropriate that minority educational
institutions be given preferential rights in the matter of admission of
children of their community in their own institutions while admitting students
of non-minorities which, advisedly, may be upto 50% based on inter se merits
of such students. However, it would be subject to assessment of the actual
requirement of the minorities the types of the institutions and the course of
education for which admission is being sought for and other relevant factors.

234\. Before concluding the matter, it is necessary to deal with few more
aspects which relate to the regulatory measures taken by the government with
regard to government aided minority institution. In that connection, the State
must see that regulatory measures of control of such institutions should be
minimum and there should not be interference in the internal or day-to-day
working of the management. However, the State would be justified in enforcing
the standard of education in such institutions. In case of minority
professional institutions, it can also be stipulated that passing of common
entrance test held by the State agency is necessary to seek admission. It is
for the reason that the products of such professional institutions are not
only going to serve the minorities but also to majority community. So far as
the redressal of grievances of staff and teachers of minority institutions are
concerned, a mechanism has to be evolved. Past experience shows that setting
up a Tribunal for particular class of employees is neither expedient nor
conducive to the interest of such employee. In that view of the matter each
District Judge which includes the Addl. District Judge of the respective
district be designated as Tribunal for redressal of the grievances of the
employee and staff of such institutions.

235\. Another question that arises in this connection as to on what grounds
the staff and teachers, if aggrieved, can challenge the arbitrary decisions of
the management. One of the learned senior counsel suggested that such
decisions be tested on the grounds available under the labour laws. However,
seeing the nature of the minority institutions the grounds available under
labour laws are too wide and it would be appropriate if adverse decisions of
the Management are tested on grounds of breach of principles of natural
justice and fair play or any regulation made in that respect.

236\. Subject to what have been stated above, I concur with the judgment of
Hon'ble the Chief Justice.

___________________________________________________________________________
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J.

237\. I have perused the majority judgment prepared by Hon'ble the Chief
Justice, the concurring opinion of my learned brother, Khare, J. and the
dissenting opinions given by our learned sister Ruma Pal, J. and learned
brother S.N. Variava, J.

238\. Though the questions referred to and re-framed are eleven, the Bench
deemed it fit not to answer four of them. On the contentions advanced by the
learned counsel who argued these cases in regard to the remaining seven
questions, the learned Chief Justice has formulated the following five issues
which encompass the entire field:

1\. IS THERE A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO SET UP EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND IF SO,
UNDER WHICH PROVISION?

2\. DOES UNNIKRISHNAN'S CASE REQUIRE RE-CONSIDERATION?

3\. IN CASE OF PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS (UNAIDED AND AIDED), CAN THERE BE
GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS AND, IF SO, TO WHAT EXTENT?

4\. IN ORDER, TO DETERMINE THE EXISTENCE OF A RELIGIOUS OR LINGUISTIC MINORITY
IN RELATION TO ARTICLE 30, WHAT IS TO BE THE UNIT, THE STATE OR THE COUNTRY AS
A WHOLE?

5\. TO WHAT EXTENT CAN THE RIGHTS OF AIDED PRIVATE MINORITY INSTITUTIONS TO
ADMINISTER BE REGULATED?

239\. Before I advert to these issues, it would be appropriate to record that
there was unanimity among the learned counsel appearing for the parties,
institutions, States and the learned Solicitor General appearing for the Union
of India on two aspects; the first is that all the citizens have the right to
establish educational institutions under Article 19(1)(g) and Article 26 of
the Constitution and the second is that the judgment of the Constitution Bench
of this Court in Unnikrishnan J.P. and Ors., v. State of Andhra Pradesh and
Ors. requires re- consideration, though there was some debate with regard to
the aspects which require re-consideration.

1\. IS THERE A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO SET UP EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND IF SO,
UNDER WHICH PROVISION?

240\. On this issue I respectfully agree with the view expressed by Hon'ble
the Chief Justice speaking for the majority.

241\. Part III of the Constitution which embodies fundamental rights does not
specify such a right vis-a-vis all citizens as such. However, we shall refer
to Articles 19, 26 and 30 having a bearing on this issue.

242\. Article 19 of the Constitution, insofar as it is relevant for the
present discussion, is as under:

"19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc. - (1) All
citizens shall have the right -

(a) to (f) xxx xxx xxx

(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business.

(2) to (5) xxx xxx xxx (6) Nothing in Sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall
affect the operation of any existing law insofar as it imposes, or prevent the
State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the general public,
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
sub-clause, and, in particular, nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect
the operation of any existing law insofar as it relates to, or prevent the
State from making any law relating to,--

(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any
profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, or

(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a Corporation owned or controlled by
the State, of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise."

243\. Article 19 confers on all citizens rights specified in Sub-clauses (a)
to (g). The fundamental rights enshrined in Sub-clause (g) of Clause (1) of
Article 19 of the Constitution are to practise any profession, or to carry on
any occupation, trade or business. We are concerned here with the right to
establish educational institution to impart education at different levels,
primary, secondary, higher, technical, professional, etc. Education is
essentially a charitable object and imparting education is, in my view, a kind
of service to the community, therefore, it cannot be brought under 'trade or
business' nor can it fall under 'profession'. Nevertheless, having regard to
the width of the meaning of the terms 'occupation' elucidated in the judgment
of Hon'ble the Chief Justice, the service which a citizen desires to render by
establishing educational institutions can be read in 'occupation'. This right,
like other rights enumerated in Sub- clause (g), is controlled by Clause (6)
of Article 19. The mandate of Clause (6) is that nothing is Sub-clause (g)
shall affect the operation of any existing law, insofar it imposes or prevent
the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of general public,
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of right conferred by the said sub-
clause and, in particular, nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the
operation of any existing law insofar as it relates to or prevent the State
from making nay law relating to: (i) the professional or technical
qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any
occupation, trade or business; or (ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a
Corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry
or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or
otherwise. Therefore, it may be concluded that the right of a citizen to run
educational institutions can be read into "occupation" falling in Sub-clause
(g) of Clause (1) of Article 19 which would be subject to the discipline of
Clause (6) thereof.

244\. Every religious denomination or a section thereof is conferred the
right, inter alia, to establish and maintain institution for religious and
charitable purpose, incorporated in Clause (a) of Article 26, which reads
thus:

"26. Freedom to manage religious affairs - Subject to public order, morality
and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the
right--

(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable
purposes;

(b) to (d) xxx xxx xxx"

245\. The right under Clause (a) is a group right and is available to every
religious denomination or any section thereof, be it of majority or any
section thereof. It is evident from the opening words of Article 26 that this
right is subject to public order, morality and health.

246\. The Constitution protects the cultural and educational rights of such
minorities as are specified in Articles 29 and 30.

247\. Article 29 deals with the protection of interests of minorities. If
affords protection to minorities who have a distinct language, script or
culture of their own and declares that they shall have the right to conserve
the same provided they form a section of citizens residing in the territory of
India. Sub-clause (1) of Section 29 is in the following terms: "29. Protection
of interests of minorities - (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the
territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or
culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same."

248\. We shall advert to Clause (2) of Article 29 separately;

249\. Article 30 of the Constitution confers a special right on the minorities
to establish and administer educational institutions. For the purposes of this
Article, religious or linguistic minorities alone are recognised for
conferring rights under Article 30. Article 30 reads as under:

"30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions
- (1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the
right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.

(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any
property of an educational institution established and administered by a
minority, referred to in Clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount
fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is
such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.

(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions,
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is
under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language."

250\. Clause (1) of Article 30 provides that all minorities, whether based on
religion on language, shall have the right (i) to establish and (ii)
administer educational institutions of their choice. The amplitude of the
right is couched in very wide language. It is also a group right but any
individual belonging to minorities, linguistic or religious, may exercise this
right for the benefit of his own group. It is significant to note that the
right conferred under Article 30 is not subjected to any limitations. The
Article speaks of "their choice". The right to establish and administer
educational institutions is of the choice of the minorities. The expression
"institutions of their choice" means institutions for the benefit of the
minorities; the word 'choice' encompasses both of the students as well as of
the type of education to be imparted in such educational institutions.

251\. It has been settled by a catena of decisions of this Court [In Re The
Kerala Education Bill, 1957 [1959 SCR 995], Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhjai and Ors.
v. State of Bombay and Anr., The Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society and
Anr. Etc. v. State of Gujarat and Anr. and St. Stephen's College v. University
of Delhi that Article 30 of the Constitution conferred special rights on the
minorities (linguistic or religious). The word 'minority' is not defined in
the Constitution but literally it means 'a non-dominant' group. It is a
relative term and is referred to, to represent the smaller of two members,
sections or group called 'majority'. In that sense, there may be political
minority, religious minority, linguistic minority, etc.

252\. The other clauses of this Article will be discussed separately.

253\. With these few comments, I am in respectful agreement with the majority
judgment on issue No. 1.

2\. DOES UNNIKRISHNAN'S CASE REQUIRE RE-CONSIDERATION?

3\. IN CASE OF PRIVATE INSTITUTION (UNAIDED AND AIDED) CAN THERE BE GOVERNMENT
REGULATIONS AND, IS SO, TO WHAT EXTENT?

4\. IN ORDER TO DETERMINE THE EXISTENCE OF A RELIGIOUS OR LINGUISTIC MINORITY
IN RELATION TO ARTICLE 30, WHAT IS TO BE THE UNIT, THE STATE OR THE COUNTRY AS
A WHOLE?

On these issues, I respectfully agree with the reasoning and conclusion of the
majority.

5\. TO WHAT EXTENT CAN THE RIGHTS OF AIDED PRIVATE MINORITY INSTITUTIONS TO
ADMINISTER BE REGULATED?

254\. In regard to this issue and particularly on the interpretation of
Article 29(2) vis-a-vis, clauses (1) and (2) of Article 30 and the conclusion
recorded by the majority, I have some reservations. I could not persuade
myself to agree with the majority judgment as well as the opinions of my
learned brethren Khare, J. and more so with the dissenting opinion of Variava,
J. with which Ashok Bhan, J. agreed. On this aspect, I agree with the
reasoning and conclusion of our learned sister Ruma Pal, J. I would give my
reasons for this conclusion later.

255\. In the result I am in respectful agreement with the answer recorded in
the majority judgment on question Nos. 1, 2, 3(a), 3(b) and 4 except to the
extent of reasoning and interpretation of Articles 29(2) and 30(1) on which
the answer is based. I agree, with respect, with answers to questions 3(a),
5(c), 6(a), 6(b) and 7. In regard to question No. 8, reconsideration of the
judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in St. Stephen's College
(supra) which relates to aided minority institutions, I agree with the answer
recorded in the majority judgment, except to the extent of interplay between
Article 29(2) and 30(1) and giving to the authorities power to prescribe a
percentage having regard to the type of institution and educational needs of
minorities. I agree also with the answer to question No. 9.

256\. With regard to answer to question No. 5(b) and the common answer to
question Nos. 10 and 11, in the light of the comments made above, I would
answer that all the citizens have a right to establish and administer
educational institutions under Articles 19(1)(g) and 26. The minorities have
an additional right to establish and administer educational institution 'of
their choice' under Article 30(1). The extent of these rights are, therefore,
different. A comparison of Articles 18, 26 and 30 would show that whereas the
educational institutions established and run by the citizens under Article
19(1)(g) and Article 26(a) are subject to the discipline of Articles 19(6) and
26 there are no such limitations in Article 30 of the Constitution, so in that
the right conferred thereunder is absolute. However, the educational
institutions established by the minorities under Article 30(1) will be subject
only to the regulatory measures which should be consistent with Article 30(1)
will be subject only to the regulatory measures which should be consistents
with Article 30(1) of the Constitution. My answer to question 5(b) is that the
right of the minority institutions to admit students of the minority, in any,
would not be affected in any way by receipt of State and, I intend to dilate
on this aspect of the matter in my separate reasoned opinion later. It is
sufficient to state at this stage that subject to this., I agree with the
common answer to question Nos. 10 and 11.

___________________________________________________________________________
Ruma Pal, J.

257\. I have had the privilege of reading the opinion of Hon'ble the Chief
Justice. Although I am in broad agreement with most of the conclusions arrived
at in the judgment, I have to record my respectful dissent with the answer to
Question 1 and Question 8 in so far as it holds that Article 29(2) is
applicable to Article 30(1). I consequently differ with the conclusions as
stated in answer to Questions 4, 5(b) and 11 to the extent mentioned in this
opinion.

258\. Re: Question 1 What is the meaning and content of the expression
'minorities" in Article 30 of the Constitution of India?

Article 30 affords protection to minorities in respect of limited rights,
namely, the setting up and administration of an educational institution. The
question of protection raises three questions : (1) protection to whom? (2)
against whom? and (3) against what? The word minority means "numerically
less". The question then is numerically less in relation to the country or the
State or some other political or geographical boundary?

259\. The protection under Article 30 is against any measure, legislative or
otherwise, which infringes the right's granted under that article. The right
is not claimed in a vacuum -- it is claimed against a particular legislative
or executive measure and the question of minority status must be judged in
relation to the offending piece of legislation or executive order. If the
source of the infringing action is the State, then the protection must be
given against the State and the status of the individual or group claiming the
protection must be determined with reference to the territorial limits of the
State. If however the protection is limited to State action, it will leave the
group which is otherwise a majority for the purpose of State legislation,
vulnerable to Union legislation which operates on a national basis. When the
entire nation is sought to be affected, surely the question of minority status
must be determined with reference to the country as a whole.

260\. In Re: Kerala Education Bill, 1957 1959 SCR 995, p.1047, the contention
of the State of Kerala was that in order to constitute a minority for the
purposes of Articles 29(1) and 30(1), persons must be numerically in the
minority in the particular area or locality in which educational institution
is or is intended to be constituted. The argument was negatived as being held
inherently fallacious (p.1049) and also contrary to the language of Article
350A. However, the Court expressly refrained from finally opining as to
whether the existence of a minority community should in circumstances and for
the purposes of law of that State be determined on the basis of the population
of the whole State or whether it should be determined on the State basis only
when the validity of a law extending to the whole State is in question or
whether it should be determined on the basis of the population of a particular
locality when the law under attack applies only to that locality. In other
words the issue was - should the minority status be determined with reference
to the source of legislation viz., the State legislature or with reference to
the extent of the law's application. Since in that case the Bill in question
was admittedly a piece of State legislation and also extended to the whole of
the State of Kerala it was held that "minority must be determined by reference
to the entire population of that State." (p.1050)

261\. In the subsequent decision in DAV College v. State of Punjab (I) 1971
SCR (Supp) 688, 697, this Court opted for the first principle namely that the
position of minorities should be determined in relation to the source of the
legislation in question and it was clearly said: "Though there was a faint
attempt to canvas the position that religious or linguistic minorities should
be minorities in relation to the entire population of the country in our view
they are to be determined only in relation to the particular legislation which
is sought to be impugned, namely that if it is the State legislature these
minorities have to be determined in relation to the population of the State."

262\. In D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab (II), 1971 SCR (Supp) 677, Punjabi
had been sought to be enforced as the sole medium of instruction and for
examinations on the ground that it was the national policy of the Government
of India to energetically develop Indian languages and literature. The College
in question used Hindi as the medium of instruction and Devnagri as the
script. Apart from holding that the State Legislature was legislatively
incompetent to make Punjabi the sole medium of instruction, the Court
reaffirmed the fact that the College although run by the Hindu community which
represents the national majority, in Punjab it was a religious minority with a
distinct script and therefore the State could not compel the petitioner-
College to teach in Punjabi or take examinations in that language with
Gurmukhi script.

263\. But assuming that Parliament had itself prescribed Hindi as the
compulsory medium of instruction in all educational institutions throughout
the length and breadth of the country. If a minority's status is to be
determined only with respect to the territorial limits of a State, non- Hindi
speaking persons who are in a majority in their own State but in a minority in
relation to the rest of the country, would not be able to impugn the
legislation on the ground that it interferes with their right to preserve a
distinct language and script. On the other hand a particular institution run
by members of the same group in a different State would be able to challenge
the same legislation and claim protection in respect of the same language and
culture.

264\. Apart from this incongruity, such an interpretation would be contrary to
Article 29(1) which contains within itself an indication of the 'unit' as far
as minorities are concerned when it says that any section of the citizens
residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the
same. Merely because persons having a distinct language, script or culture are
resident within the political and geographical limits of a State within which
they may be in a majority, would not take them out of the phrase "section of
citizens residing in the territory of India". It is a legally fortuitous
circumstances that states have been created along linguistic lines after the
framing of the Constitution.

265\. In my opinion, therefore, the question whether a group is a minority or
not must be determined in relation to the source and territorial application
of the particular legislation against which protection is claimed and I would
answer question 1 accordingly.

266\. Re: Question 8 Whether the ratio laid down by this Court in the St.
Stephen's case (St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi is correct ? If
no, what order?

267\. In St. Stephen's College, the Court decided (a) that the minorities
right to admit students under Article 30(1) had to be balanced with the rights
conferred under Article 29(2). Therefore the State could regulate the
admission of students of the minority institutions so that not more than 50%
of the available seats were filled in by the children of the minority
community and (b) the minority institution could evolve its own procedure for
selecting students for admission in the institutions. There can no be quarrel
with the decision of the court on the second issue. However, as far as the
first principle is concerned, in my view the decision is erroneous and does
not correctly state the law.

268\. Article 30(1) of the Constitution provides that "All minorities, whether
based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and
administer educational institutions of their choice". Article 29(2) on the
other hand says that "no citizen shall be denied admission into any education
institution, maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them."

269\. Basically, the question is whether Article 30(1) is subject to Article
29(2) or is Article 29(2) subject to Article 30(1). If Article 30(1) does not
confer the right to admit students then of course there is no question of
conflict with Article 29(2) which covers the field of admission into "any
education institution". The question, therefore, assumes that the right
granted to minorities under Article 30(1) involves the right to admit
students. Is this assumption valid? The other assumption on which the question
proceeds is that minority institutions not receiving aid are outside the arena
of this apparent conflict. Therefore the issue should be more appropriately
framed as:- does the receipt of State aid and consequent admission of non-
minority students affect the rights of minorities to establish and administer
educational institution of their choice? I have sought to answer the question
on an interpretation of the provisions of the Constitution so that no
provision is rendered nugatory or redundant Sri Venkataramana Devaru and Ors.
v. The State of Mysore and Ors. 1958 SCR 895, 918; Pandit M.S.M. Sharma v.
Shri Sri Krishna Sinha; 1959 Suppl 1 SCR 806,; on an interpretation of the
provisions in the context of the objects which were sought to be achieved by
the framers of the Constitution; and, finally on a consideration of how this
Court has construed these provisions in the past.

270\. Both Articles 29 and 30 are in Part III of the Constitution which deals
with 'Fundamental Rights'. The fundamental rights have been grouped and placed
under separate headings. For the present purposes, it is necessary to consider
the second, fourth and fifth groups. The other Articles in the other groups
are not relevant. The second group consists of Articles 14 to 18 which have
been clubbed under 'Right to Equality'. Articles 25 to 28 are placed under the
fourth heading 'Right to Freedom of Religion'. Articles 29 and 30 fall within
the fifth heading 'Cultural and Educational Rights'.

271\. The rights guaranteed under the several parts of Part III of the
Constitution overlap and provide different facets of the objects sought to be
achieved by the Constitution. These objectives have been held to contain the
basic structure of the Constitution which cannot be amended in exercise of the
powers under Article 368 of the Constitution Keshvananda Bharti v. State of
Kerala. Amongst these objectives are those of Equality and Secularism.
According to those who have argued in favour of a construction by which
Article 29(2) prevails order Article 30, Article 29(2) ensures the equal right
to education to all citizens, whereas if Article 30 is given predominance it
would not be in keeping with the achievement of this equality and would
perpetuate differences on the basis of language and more importantly,
religion, which would be contrary to the secular character of the
Constitution. Indeed the decision in St. Stephens in holding that Article
29(2) applies to Article 30(1) appears to have proceeded on similar
considerations. Thus it was said that unless Article 29(2) applied to Article
30(1) it may lead to "religious bigotry"; that it would be "inconsistent with
the central concept of secularism" and "equality embedded in the Constitution"
and that an "educational institution irrespective of community to which it
belongs is a melting pot in our national life". Although Article 30(1) is not
limited to religious minorities, having regard to the tenor of the arguments
and the reasoning in St. Stephens in support of the first principle, I propose
to consider the argument on 'Secularism" first.

272\. Article 30 and Secularism The word 'secular' is commonly understood in
contradiction to the word 'religious'. The political philosophy of a secular
Government has been developed in the west in the historical context of the
pre-eminence of the established church and the exercise of power by it over
society and its institutions. With the burgeoning presence of diverse
religious groups and the growth of liberal and democratic ideas, religious
intolerance and the attendant violence and persecution of "non-believers" was
replaced by a growing awareness of the right of the individual to profession
of faith, or non-profession of any faith. The democratic State gradually
replaced and marginalised the influence of the church. But the meaning of the
word 'secular State' in its political context can and has assumed different
meanings in different countries, depending broadly on historical and social
circumstances, the political philosophy and the felt needs of a particular
country. In one country, secularism may mean an actively negative attitude to
all religions and religious institutions; in another it may mean a strict
"wall of separation" between the State and religion and religious
institutions. In India the State is secular in that there is no official
religion, India is not a theocratic State. However the Constitution does
envisage the involvement of the State in matters associated with religion and
religious institutions, and even indeed with the practice, profession and
propagation of religion in its most limited and distilled meaning.

273\. Although the idea of secularism may have been borrowed in the Indian
Constitution from the west. It has adopted its own unique brand of secularism
based on its particular history and exigencies which are far removed in many
ways from secularism as it is defined and followed in European countries, the
United States of America and Australia.

274\. The First Amendment to the American Constitution is as follows:
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof."

275\. In the words of Jefferson, the clause against establishment of religion
by law was intended to erect 'a wall of separation between Church and State'.
'Reynolds v. United States', (1878) 98 U S 145 at p.164.

276\. The Australian Constitution has adopted the First Amendment in Section
116 which is based on that Amendment. It reads: "The Commonwealth shall not
make any laws for establishing any religion, or for imposing any religious
observance, or for prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and no
religious test shall be required as a qualification for any office or public
trust under the Commonwealth."Kidangazhi Manakkal Narayanan Nambudiripad v.
State of Madras.

277\. Under the Indian Constitution there is no such "wall of separation"
between the State and religious institutions. Article 16(5) recognises the
validity of laws relating to management of religious and denominational
institutions. Article 28(2) contemplates the State itself managing educational
institutions wherein religious instructions are to be imparted. And among the
subjects over which both the Union and the States have legislative competence
as set out in List No. III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution Entry
No. 28 are:

"Charitable and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments
and religious institutions".

278\. Although like other secular Governments, the Indian Constitution in
Article 25(1) provides for freedom of conscience and the individual's right
freely to profess, practice and propagate religion, the right is expressly
subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions in
Part III of the Constitution. The involvement of the State with even the
individual's right under Article 25(1) is exemplified by Article 25(2) by
which the State is empowered to make any law.

"a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other
secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;

(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu
religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of
Hindus.

279\. As a result the courts have upheld laws which may regulate or restrict
matters associated with religious practices if such practice does not form an
integral part of the particular religion Ramanuja v. State of Tamil Nadu
Quareshi v. State of Bihar 1959 SCR 629.

280\. Freedom of religious groups or collective religious rights are provided
for under Article 26 which says that:

"Subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or
any section thereof shall have the right-

(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable
purposes.

(b) To manage and acquire movable and immovable property; and

(c) To own and acquire movable and immovable property; and

(d) To administer such property in accordance with law.

281\. The phrase "matters of religion" has been strictly construed so that
matters not falling strictly within that phrase may be subject to control and
regulation by the State. The phrase 'subject to public order, morality and
health' and "in accordance with law" also envisages extensive State control
over religious institutions. Article 26(a) allows all persons of any religious
denomination to set up an institution for a charitable purpose, and
undisputedly the advancement of education is a charitable purpose. Further,
the right to practise, profess and propagate religion under Article 25 if read
with Article 26(a) would allow all citizens to exercise such rights through an
educational institution. These rights are not limited to minorities and are
available to 'all persons'. Therefore, the Constitution does not consider the
setting up of educational institutions by religious denominations or sects to
impart the theology of that particular denomination as anti-secular. Having
regard to the structure of the Constitution and its approach to 'Secularism',
the observation in St. Stephens noted earlier is clearly not in keeping with
'Secularism' as provided under the Indian Constitution. The Constitution as it
stands does not proceed on the 'melting pot' theory. The Indian Constitution,
rather represents a 'salad bowl' where there is homogeneity without an
obliteration of identity.

282\. The ostensible separation of religion and the State in the field of the
States revenue provided by Article 27 (which prohibits compulsion of an
individual to pay any taxes which are specifically appropriated for the
expenses for promoting or maintaining any particular religious or religious
denomination) does not, however, in terms prevent the State from making
payment out of the proceeds of taxes generally collected towards the promotion
or maintenance of any particular religious or religious denomination. Indeed,
Article 290(A) of the Constitution provides for annual payment to certain
Devaswom funds in the following terms. " A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty
thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of
the State of Kerala every year to the Travancore Devaswom fund; and a sum of
thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of
the Consolidated Fund of the State of Tamil Nadu every year to the Devaswom
Fund established in that State for the maintenance of Hindu temples and
shrines in the territories transferred to that State on the 1st day of
November, 1956, from the State of Travancore Cochin." This may be compared
with the decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in Everson v. Board of Education
(330 IUS 1) where it was held that the State could not reimburse
transportation charges of children attending a Roman Catholic School.

283\. Article 28 in fact brings to the fore the nature of the word 'secular'
used in the preamble to the Constitution and indicates clearly that there is
no wall of separation between the State and religious institutions under the
Indian Constitution. No doubt Article 28(1) provides that if the institution
is an educational one and it is wholly maintained by the State funds,
religious instruction cannot be provided in such institution. However, Article
28(1) does not forbid the setting up of an institution for charitable purposes
by any religious denomination nor does it prohibit the running of such
institution even though it may be wholly maintained by the State. What it
prohibits is the giving of religious instruction. Even, this prohibition is
not absolute. It is subject to the extent of Sub-Article (2) of Article 28
which provides that if the educational institution has been established under
any endowment or trust which requires that religious instruction shall be
imparted in such institution, then despite the prohibition in Article 28(1)
and despite the fact that the education institution is in fact administered by
the State, religious instruction can be imparted in such institution. Article
28(2) thus in no uncertain terms envisages that an educational institution
administered by the State and wholly maintained by the State can impart
religious instruction. It recognises in Article 28(3) that there may be
educational institutions imparting religious instruction according to
whichever faith and conducting religious worship which can be recognised by
the State and which can also receive aid out of State funds.

284\. Similarly, Article 28(3) provides that no individual attending any
educational institution which may have been recognised by the State or is
receiving State aid can be compelled to take part in any religious instruction
that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any religious worship
that may be conducted in such institution without such person's consent.
Implicit in this prohibition is that acknowledgement that the State can
recognize and aid an educational institution giving religious instruction or
conducting religious worship. In the United States, on the other hand it has
been held that State maintained institutions cannot give religious instruction
even if such instruction is not compulsory. (See. Tiiinois v. Board of
Education 1947 (82) Law Ed. 649).

285\. In the ultimate analysis the Indian Constitution does not unlike the
United States, subscribe to the people of non- interference of the State in
religious organisations buy it remains secular in that it strives to respect
all religions equally, the equality being understood in its substantive sense
as is discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.

286\. Article 30(1) and Article 14 'Equality' which has been referred to in
the Preamble is provided for in a group of Articles led by Article 14 of the
Constitution which says that the State shall not deny to any person equality
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of
India. Although stated in absolute terms Article 14 proceeds on the premise
that such equality of treatment is required to be given to persons who are
equally circumstanced. Implicit in the concept of equality is the concept that
persons who are in fact unequally circumentanced cannot be treated on par. The
Constitution has itself provided for such classification in providing for
special or group or class rights. Some of these are in Part III itself
[Article 26, Article 29(1) and Article 30(1)] Other such Articles conferring
group rights or making special provision for a particular class include
Articles 336 and 337 where special provision has been made for the Anglo-
Indian Community. Further examples are to be found in Articles 122, 212 and
other Articles giving immunity from the ordinary process of the law to persons
holding certain offices. Again Articles 371 to 371(H) contain special
provisions for particular States.

287\. The principles of non-discrimination which form another fact of equality
are provided for under the Constitution under Articles 15(1), 16(1) and 29(2).
The first two articles are qualified by major exceptions under Articles 15(3)
and (4), 16 (3), (4), (4A) and Article 335 by which the Constitution has
empowered the Executive to enact legislation or otherwise specially provide
for certain classes of citizens. The fundamental principle of equality is not
compromised by these provisions as they are made on a consideration that the
person so 'favoured' are unequals to begin with whether socially, economically
or politically. Furthermore, the use of the word 'any person' in Article 14 in
the context of legislation in general or executive action affecting group
rights is construed to mean persons who are similarly situated. The
classification of such persons for the purposes of testing the differential
treatment must, of course, be intelligible and reasonable the reasonableness
being determined with reference to the object for which the action is taken.
This is the law which has been settled by this Court in a series of decisions,
the principle having been enunciated as early as in 1950 in Chiranjit Lal
Chowdhury v. Union of India and Ors. 1950 SCR 869.

288\. The equality, therefore, under Article 14 is not indiscriminate.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the concept of equality permits rational or
discriminating discrimination. Conferment of special benefits or protection or
rights to a particular group of citizens for rational reasons is envisaged
under Article 14 and is implicit in the concept of equality. There is no
abridgment of the content of Article 14 thereby-- but an exposition and
practical application of such content.

289\. The distinction between classes created by Parliament and classes
provided for in the Constitution itself, is that the classification under the
first may be subjected to judicial review and tested against the touchstone of
the Constitution. But the classes originally created by the Constitution
itself are not so subject as opposed to constitutional amendments. See
Keshavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala AIR 1973 1461

290\. On a plain reading of the provisions of the Article, all minorities
based on religion or language, shall have the right to (1) establish and (2)
administer educational institutions of their choice. The emphasized words
unambiguously and in mandatory terms grant the right to all minorities to
establish and administer educational institutions. I would have thought that
it is self evident and in any event, well settled by a series of decisions of
this Court that Article 30(1) creates a special class in the field of
educational institutions -- a class which is entitled to special protection in
the matters of setting up and administering educational institutions of their
choice. This has been affirmed in the decisions of this Court where the right
has been variously described as "a sacred obligation" In re Kerala Education
Bill, 1957 1959 SCR 995, 1070, "am absolute right" Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai v.
State of Bombay, "a special right" Rev Father W. Proost and Ors. v. State of
Bihar 1969 (2) SCR 173, 192, "a guaranteed right" State of Kerala v. Very Rev.
Mother Provincial 1971 (1) SCR 734, 740, "the conscience of the nation" St.
Xaviers College v. Gujarat, "a befitting pledge" ibid 223, " a special right"
ibid 224 and an "article of faith" Lily Kurain v. Lewi.

291\. The question then is -- does this special right in an admitted
linguistic or religious minority to establish and administer an educational
institution encompass the right to admit students belonging to that particular
community.

292\. Before considering the earlier decision on this, a semantic analysis of
the word used in Article 30(1) of indicates that the right to admit students
is an intrinsic part of Article 30(1).

293\. First -- Article 30(1) speaks of the right to set up an educational
institution. An educational institution is not a structure of bricks and
mortar. It is the activity which is carried on in the structure which gives it
its character as an educational institution. An educational institution
denotes the process or activity of education not only involving the educators
but also those receiving education. It follows that the right to set up an
educational institution necessarily includes not only the selection of
teachers or educators but also the admission of students.

294\. Second -- Article 30(1) speaks of the right to "administer" an
educational institution. If the administration of an educational institution
includes and means its organisation then the organisation cannot be limited to
the infrastructure for the purposes of education and exclude the persons for
whom the infrastructure is set up, namely, the students. The right to admit
students is, therefore, part of the right to administer an educational
institution.

295\. Third, - the benefit which has been guaranteed under Article 30 is a
protection of benefit guaranteed to all members of the minority as a whole.
What is protected is the community right which includes the right of children
of the minority community to receive education and the right of parents to
have their children educated in such institution. The content of the right
lies not in merely managing an educational institution but doing so for the
benefit of the community. Benefit can only lie in the education received. It
would be meaningless to give the minorities the right to establish and set up
an organisation for giving education as an end in itself, and deny them the
benefit of the education. This would render the right a mere form without any
content. The benefit to the community and the purpose of the grant of the
right is in the actual education of the members of the community.

296\. Finally, - the words 'of their choice' is not qualified by any words of
limitation and would include the right to admit students of the minority's
choice. Since the primary purpose of Article 30(1) is to give the benefit to
the members of the minority community in question that 'choice' cannot be
exercised in a manner that deprives that community of the benefit. Therefore,
the choice must be directed towards fulfilling the needs of the community .
How that need is met, whether by general education or otherwise, is for the
community to determine.

297\. The interpretation is also in keeping with what this Court has
consistently held. In state of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society, the Court
said:

"..... surely then there must be implicit in such fundamental right the right
to impart instruction in their own institutions to the children of their own
Community in their own language. To hold otherwise will be to deprive Article
29(1) and Article 30(1) of the greater part of their contents."

298\. In Kerala Education Bill, 1957, it was said:

"The minorities, quite understandably, regard it as essential that the
education of their children should be in accordance with the teachings of
their religion and they hold, quite honestly, that such an education cannot be
obtained in ordinary schools designed for all the members of the public but
can only be secured in schools conducted under the influence and guidance of
people well versed in the tenets of their religion and in the traditions of
their culture. The minorities evidently desire that education should be
imparted to the children of their community in an atmosphere congenial to the
growth of their culture. Our Constitution makers recognised the validity of
their claim and to allay their fears conferred on them the fundamental rights
referred to above."

299\. The issue of admission to minority institutions under Article 30 arose
in the decision of Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai where the State's order reserving 80
per cent of the available seats in a minority Institution for admission of
persons nominated by the Government under threat of derecognition if the
reservation was not complied with, was struck down as being violative of
Article 30(1). It was said that although the right of the minority may be
regulated to secure the proper functioning of the institution, the regulations
must be in the interest of institution and not 'in the interest of outsiders'.
The view was reiterated in St. Xaviers College when it was said:

-The real reason embodied in Article 30(1) of the Constitution is the conscience of the nation that the minorities religious as well as linguistic, are not prohibited from establishing and administering educational institutions of their choice for the purpose of giving their children the best general education to make them complete men and women of the country." 

300\. In St. Stephen's College, the Court recognised that: "The right to
select students for admission is a part of administration. It is indeed an
important facet of administration. This power also could be regulated but the
regulation must be reasonable just like any other regulation. It should be
conducive to the welfare of the minority institution or for the betterment of
those who resort to it."

301\. However, in a statement which is diametrically opposed to the earlier
decisions of this Court, it was held:

"The choice of institution provided in Article 30(1) does not mean that the
minorities could establish educational institution for the benefit of their
own community people. Indeed they cannot. It was pointed out in Re, Kerala
Educational Bill that the minorities cannot establish educational institution
only for the benefit of their community. If such was the aim, Article 30(1)
would have been differently worded and it would have contained the words "for
their own community". In the absence of such words it is legally impermissible
to construe the article as conferring the right on the minorities to establish
educational institution for their own benefit...." (P. 607)

302\. This conclusion, in my respectful view, is based on a misreading of the
decision of this Court in Kerala Educational Bill. In that case, there was no
question of the non-minority students being given admission overlooking the
needs of the minority community. The Court was not called upon to consider the
question. The underlying assumption in that case was that the only obstacle to
the non-minority student getting admission into the minority institution was
the State's order to that effect and not the "choice" of the minority
institution itself and a minority institution may choose to admit students not
belonging to the community without shedding its minority character, provided
the choice was limited to a 'sprinkling'. In fact the learned Judges in St.
Stephens case have themselves in a subsequent portion of the judgment (p.611)
taken a somewhat contradictory stand to the view quoted earlier when they
said:

".....the minorities have the right to admit their own candidates to maintain
the minority character of their institutions. That is a necessary concomitant
right which flows from the right to establish and administer educational
institution in Article 30(1). There is also a related right to the parents in
the minority communities. The parents are entitled to have their children
educated in institutions having an atmosphere congenial to their own
religion."

303\. The conclusion, therefore, is that the right to admission being an
essential part of the constitutional guarantee under Article 30(1) a
curtailment of that fundamental right in so far as it affect benefit of the
minority community would amount to the an infringement of that guarantee.

304\. An Institution set up by minorities for educating members of the
minority community does not cease to be a minority institution merely because
it takes aid. There is nothing in Article 30(1) which allows the drawing of a
distinction in the exercise of the right under that Article between needy
minorities and affluent ones. Article 30(2) of the Constitution reinforces
this when it says, "The State shall not, in granting aid to educational
institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the ground
that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or
language". This assumes that even after the grant of aid by the State to an
educational institution under the management of the minority, the educational
institution continues to be a minority educational institution. According to
some, Article 30(2) merely protects the minority's right of management of the
educational institution and not the students who form part of such
institution. Such a reading would be contrary to Article 30(1) itself. The
argument is based on the construction of the word 'management'. 'Management'
may be defined as 'the process of managing' and is not limited to the people
managing the institution.Concise Oxford Dictionary (10th Edition) 864. In the
context of Article 30(1) and having regard to the content of the right,
namely, the education of the minority community, the word 'management' in
Article 30(2) must be construed to mean the 'process and not the 'persons' in
management 'Aid' by definition means to give support or to held or assist. It
cannot be that by giving 'aid' one destroys those to whom 'aid' is given. The
obvious purpose of Article 30(2) is to forbid the State from refusing aid to a
minority educational institution merely because it is being run as a minority
educational institution. Besides Article 30(2) is an additional right
conferred on minorities under Article 30(1). It cannot be construed in a
manner which is destructive of or as a limitation on Article 30(1). As has
been said earlier by this Court in Rev. Sidhabhai Sabhai, supra Clause (2) of
Article 30 is only another non-discriminatory clause in the Constitution. It
is a right in addition to the rights under Article 30(1) and does not operate
to derogate from the provisions in Clause (1). When in decision after
decision, this Court has held that aid in whatever form is necessary for an
educational institution to survive, it is a specious argument to say that a
minority institution can preserve its rights under Article 30(1) by refusing
aid.

305\. I would, therefore, respectfully agree with the conclusion expressed in
the majority opinion that grant of aid under Article 30(2) cannot be used as a
lever to take away the rights of the minorities under Article 30(1).

306\. Articles 29(2) and 30(1) Article 29(2) says that "No citizen shall be
denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, case,
language or any of them".

307\. It is because Article 30(1) covers the right to admit students that
there is an apparent conflict between Article 29(2) and Article 30(1). There
are two ways of considering the relationship between Article 30(1) and Article
29(2), the first in the context of Article 14, the second by an interpretation
of Article 29(2) itself.

308\. Article 29(2) has not been expressed as a positive right. Nevertheless
in substance it confers a right on a person not to be denied admission into an
aided institution only on the basis of religion, race etc. The language of
Article 29(2) reflects the language used in other non-discriminatory Articles
in the Constitution namely, Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 15 and Clauses (1)
and (2) of Article 16. As already noted both the Articles contain exceptions
which permit laws being made which make special provisions on the basis of
sex, caste and race. Even in the absence of Clauses (3) and (4) of Article 15
and Clauses (3), (4) and 4(A) of Article 16, Parliament could have made
special provisions on the forbidden bases of race, caste or sex, provided that
the basis was not the only reason for creating a separate class. There would
have to be an additional rational factor qualifying such basis to bring it
within the concept of 'equality in fact' on the principle of 'rational
classification'. For example when by law a reservation is made in favour of a
member of a backward class in the matter of appointment, the reservation is no
doubt made on the basis of caste. It is also true that to the extent of the
reservation other citizens are discriminated against on one of the bases
prohibited under Article 16(1). Nevertheless such legislation would be valid
because the reservation is not only on the basis of caste/race but because of
the additional factor of their backwardness. Clauses (3) and (4) of Article 15
like Clause 3, 4 and 4(A) of Article 16 merely make explicit what is otherwise
implicit in the concept of equality under Article 14.

309\. By the same token, Article 29(2) does not create an absolute right for
citizens to be admitted into any educational institution maintained by the
State or receiving aid out of State funds. It does not prohibit the denial of
admission on grounds other than religion, race, caste or language. Therefore,
reservation of admissions on the grounds of residence, occupation of parents
or other bases has been held to be a valid classification which does not
derogate from the principles of equality under Article 14. [See: Kumari Chitra
Ghosh v. Union of India : D.N. Chanchala v. State of Mysore: 1971 SCR (Supp.)
608. Even in respect of the "prohibited" bases, like the other non-
discriminatory Articles, Article 29(2) is constitutionally subject to the
principle of 'rational classification'. If a person is denied admission on the
basis of a constitutional right, that is not a denial only on the basis of
religion, race etc. This is exemplified in Article 15(4) which provides for:
"Nothing in this article or in Clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and
the Tribes."

310\. To the extent that legislation is enacted under Article 15(4) making
special provision in respect of a particular caste, there is a denial of
admission to others who do not belong to the caste. Nevertheless, Article
15(4) does not contradict the right under Article 29(2). This is because of
the use of the word 'only' in Article 29(2). Article 15(4) is based on the
rationale that Schedule Castes and Tribes are not on par with other members of
society in the matter of education and, therefore, special provision is to be
made for them. It is not, therefore, only caste but this additional factor
which prevents clause 15(4) from conflicting with Article 29(2) and Article
14.

311\. Then again, under Article 337, grants are made available for the benefit
of the Anglo-Indian community in respect of education, provided that any
educational institution receiving such grant makes available at least 40% of
the annual admission for members of communities other than the Anglo-Indian
community. Hence 60% of the admission to an aided Anglo-Indian School is
constitutionally reservable for members of the Anglo-Indian community. To the
extent of such reservation, there is necessarily a denial of admission to non-
Anglo Indians on the basis of race.

312\. Similarly, the Constitution has also carved out a further exception to
Article 29(2) in the form of Article 30(1) by recognising the rights of
special classes in the form of minorities based on language or religion to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The right
of the minorities under Article 30(1) does not operate as discrimination
against other citizens only on the ground of religion or language. The reason
for such classification is not only religion or language per se but minorities
based on religion and language. Although, it is not necessary to justify a
classification made by the Constitution, this fact of 'minorityship' is the
obvious rationale for making a distinction, the underlying assumption being
that minorities by their very numbers are in a politically disadvantaged
situation and require special protection at least in the field of education.

313\. Articles 15(4), 337 and 30 are therefore facets of substantive equality
by making special provision for special classes on special considerations.

314\. Even on general principles of interpretation, it cannot be held that
Article 29(2) is absolute and in effect wipes out Article 30(1). Article 29(2)
refers to ' any educational institution' -- the word "any" signifying the
generality of its application. Article 30(1) on the other hand refers to
'educational institutions established and administered by minorities'.
Clearly, the right under Article 30(1) is the more particular right and on the
principle of ' generalia speciaiibus non derogent, it must be held that
Article 29(2) does not override he educational institutions even if they are
aided under Article 30(1) Pandit M.S.M. Sharma v. Shri Sri Krishna Sinha: 1959
Suppl. 1 SCR 806, 860, 1939 FCR 18.

315\. Then again Article 29(2) appears under the heading 'Protection of
interests of minorities'. Whatever the historical reasons for the placement of
Article 29(2) under this head, it is clear that no general principles of
interpretation, the heading is at least a pointer or aid in construing the
meaning of Article 29(2). As Subba Rao, J said "if there is any doubt in the
interpretation of the words in the section, the heading certainly helps us to
resolve that doubt." Bhinka v. Charan Singh. Therefore, if two interpretations
of the words of Article 29(2) are possible, the one which is in keeping with
the heading of the Article must be preferred. It would follow that Article
29(2) must be construed in a manner protective of minority interests and not
destructive of them.

316\. When 'aid' is sought for by the minority institution to run its
institution for the benefit of students belonging to that particular
community, the argument on the basis of Article 29(2) is that if such an
institution asks for aid it does so at the peril of depriving the very persons
for whom aid was asked for in the first place. Apart from this anomalous
result, if the taking of aid implies that the minority institution will be
forced to give up or waive its right under Article 30(1), then on the
principle that it is not permissible to give up or waive fundamental rights,
such an interpretation is not possible. It has then been urged that Article
29(2) applies to minority institutions under Article 30(1) much in the same
way that Article 28(1) and 28(3) do. The argument proceeds on the assumption
that an educational institution set up under Article 30(1) is set up for the
purposes and with the sole object of giving religious instruction. The
assumption is wrong. At the outset, it may also be noted that Article 28(1)
and (3) do not in terms apply to linguistic minority educational institutions
at all. Furthermore, the right to set up an educational institution in which
religious instruction is to be imparted is a right which is derived from
Article 26(a) which provides that every religious denomination or any section
thereof shall have the right to establish and maintain institutions for
religious and charitable purposes, and not under Article 30(1). Educational
institutions set up under Article 26(a) are, therefore, subject to Clauses (1)
and (3) of Article 28. Article 30(1) is a right additional to Article 26(a).
This follows from the fact that it has been separately and expressly provided
for and there is nothing in the language of Article 30(1) making the right
thereunder subject to Articles 25 and 26. Unless it is so construed Article
30(1) would be rendered redundant St. Xaviers College, paras 7 to 12.
Therefore, what Article 30 does is to secure the minorities the additional
right to give general education. Although in a particular case a minority
educational institution may combine general education with religious
instruction that is done in exercise of the rights derivable from Article
26(a) and Article 30(1) and not under Article 30(1) alone. Clauses (1) and (3)
of Article 28, therefore, do not apply to Article 30(1). The argument in
support of reading Article 30(1) as being subject to Article 29(2) on the
analogy of Article 28(1) and 28(3) is, I would think, erroneous.

317\. For the reasons already stated I have held the right to admit minority
students to a minority educational institutions is an intrinsic part of
Article 30(1). To say that Article 29(2) prevails over Article 30(1) would be
to infringe and to a large extent wipe out this right. There would be no
distinction between a minority educational institution and other institutions
and the rights under Article 30(1) would be rendered wholly inoperational. It
is no answer to say that the rights of unaided minority institutions would
remain untouched because Article 29(2) does not relate to unaided institutions
at all. Whereas if one reads Article 29(2) as subject to Article 30(1) then
effect can be given to both. And it is the latter approach which is to be
followed in the interpretation of constitutional provisions. Sri Venkataramane
Dev Aru v. State of Mysore, 1958 SCR 895, 918. In other words, as long as the
minority educational institution is being run for the benefit of and catering
to the needs of the members of that community under Article 30(1), Article
29(2) would not apply. But once the minority educational institution travels
beyond the needs in the sense of requirements of its own community, at that
stage it is no longer exercising rights of admission guaranteed under Article
30(1). To put it differently, when the right of admission is exercised not to
meet the need of the minorities, the rights of admission given under Article
30(1) is to that extent removed and the institution is bound to admit students
for the balance in keeping with the provisions of Article 29(2).

318\. A simple illustration would make the position clear. 'Aid' is given to a
minority institution. There are 100 seats available in that institution. There
are 150 eligible candidates according to the procedure evolved by the
institution. Of the 150, 60 candidates belong to that particular community and
90 to other communities. The institution will be entitled, under Article 30(1)
to admit all 60 minority students first and then fill the balance 40 seats
from the other communities without discrimination in keeping with Article
29(2).

319\. I would, therefore, not subscribe to the view that Article 29(2)
operates to deprive aided minority institutions the right to admit members of
their community to educational institutions established and administered by
them either on any principle of interpretation or on any concept of equality
or secularism.

320\. The next task is to consider whether this interpretation of Article
29(2) and 30(1) is discordant with the historical context in which these
Articles came to be included in the Constitution. Before referring to the
historical context, it is necessary to keep in mind that what is being
interpreted are constitutional provisions which "have a content and a
significance that vary from age to age".Cardozo: Nature of Judicial Process,
p.17. Of particular significance is the content of the concept of equality
which has been developed by a process of judicial interpretation over the
years as discussed earlier. It is also necessary to be kept in mind that
reports of the various Committees appointed by the Constituent Assembly and
speeches made in the Constituent Assembly and the record of other proceedings
of the Constituent Assembly are admissible, if at all, merely as extrinsic
aids to construction and do not as such bind the Court. Ultimately it is for
this Court to say what is meant by the words of the Constitution.

321\. The proponents of the argument that Article 29(2) over-rides Article
30(1) have referred to excerpts from the speeches made by members of
Constituent Assembly which have been quoted in support of their view. Apart
from the doubtfulness as to the admissibility of the speeches, K.P. Verghese
v. Income Tax Officer: Sanjeev Coke v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and PV
Narasimha Rao, in my opinion, there is nothing in the speeches which shows an
intention on the part of the Constituent Assembly to abridge in any way the
special protection afforded to minorities under Article 30(1). The intention
indicated in the speeches relating to the framing of Article 29(2) appears to
be an extension of the right of non-discrimination to members of the non-
minority in respect of State aided or State maintained educational
institutions. It is difficult to find in the speeches any unambiguous
statement which points to a determination on the part of the Constituent
Assembly to curtail the special rights of the minorities under Article 30(1).
Indeed if one scrutinises the broad historical context and the sequence of
events preceding the drafting of the Constitution it is clear that one of the
primary objectives of the Constitution was to preserve, protect and guarantee
the rights of the minorities unchanged by any rule or regulation that may be
enacted by Parliament or any State legislature.

322\. The history which preluded the independence of this country and the
framing of the Constitution highlights the political context in which the
Constitution was framed and the political content of the "special" rights
given to minorities. I do not intend to burden this judgment with a detailed
reference to the historical run-up to the Constitution as ultimately adopted
by the Constituent Assembly vis-a-vis the rights of the minorities and the
importance that was placed on enacting effective and adequate constitutional
provisions to safeguard their interests. This has been adequately done by
Sikri, C.J. in Keshavanand Bharati v. State of Kerala, on the basis of which
the learned Judge came to the conclusion that the rights of the minorities
under the Constitution formed part of the basic structure of the Constitution
and were un-amendable and inalienable.

323\. I need only add that the rights of linguistic minorities assumed special
significance and support when, much after independence, the imposition of a
'unifying language' led not to unity but to an assertion of differences.
States were formed on linguistic bases showing the apparent paradox that
allowing for and protecting differences leads to unity and integrity and
enforced assimilation may lead to disaffection and unrest. The recognition of
the principle of "unity in diversity" has continued to be the hall mark of the
Constitution -- a concept which has been further strengthened by affording
further support to the protection of minorities on linguistic bases in 1956 by
way of Articles 350A and 350B and in 1978 by introducing Clause (1-A) in
Article 30 requiring "the State, that is to say, Parliament in the case of a
Central legislation or a State legislature in the case of State legislation,
in making a specific law to provide for the compulsory acquisition of the
property of minority educational institutions, to ensure that the amount
payable to the educational institution for the acquisition of its property
will not be such as will in any manner impair the functioning of the
educational institution". Society of St. Joseph's College v. Union of India.
Any judicial interpretation of the provisions of the Constitution whereby this
constitutional diversity is diminished would be contrary to this avowed intent
and the political considerations which underlie this intention.

324\. The earlier decisions of this Court show that the issue of admission to
a minority educational institution almost invariably arose in the context of
the State claiming that a minority institution had to be 'purely' one which
was established and administered by members of the minority community
concerned, strictly for the members of the minority community, with the object
only of preserving of the minority religion, language, script or culture. The
contention on the part of the executive then was that a minority institution
could not avail of the protection of Article 30(1) if there was any non-
minority element either in the establishment, administration, admission or
subjects taught. It was in that context that the Court in Kerala Education
Bill held that a 'sprinkling of outsiders' being admitted into a minority
institution did not result in the minority institution shedding its character
and ceasing to be a minority institution.p.1052. It was also in that context
that the Court in St. Xaviers College (supra) came to the conclusion that a
minority institution based on religion and language had the right to establish
and administer educational institution for imparting general secular education
and still not lose its minority character. While the effort of the Executive
was to retain the 'purity' of a minority institution and thereby to limit it.
"the principle which can be discerned in the various decisions of this Court
is that the catholic approach which led to the drafting of the provisions
relating to minority rights should not be set at naught by narrow judicial
interpretation".

325\. The 'liberal, generous and sympathetic approach' of this Court towards
the rights of the minorities has been somewhat reversed in the St. Stephens
case. Of course, this was the first decision of this Court which squarely
dealt with the inter-relationship of Article 29(2) and Article 30(1). None of
the earlier cited decisions did.

326\. The decision of this Court in Champakam Dorairajan v. State of Madras,
1951 SCR 525 cannot be construed as an authority for the proposition that
Article 29(2) overrides the constitutional right guaranteed to the minorities
under Article 30(1), as Article 30(1) was not at all mentioned in the entire
course of the judgment. Similarly, the Court in State of Bombay v. Bombay
Education Society, 1955 SCR 568 was not called upon to consider a situation of
conflict between Article 30(1) and 29(2). The Bombay Education Society, was in
fact directly concerned with Article 337 and an Anglo-Indian educational
institution. In that background, when it was suggested that Article 29(2) was
intended to benefit minorities only, the Court negatived the submission as it
would amount to a 'double protection', "double" because an Anglo-Indian
citizen would then have not only the protection of Article 337 by way of a 60%
reservation but also the benefit of Article 29(2). It was not held by the
Court that Article 29(2) would override Article 337.

327\. There is thus no question of striking a balance between Article 29(2)
and 30(1) as if they were two competing rights. Where once the Court has held:

"Equality of opportunity for unequals can only mean aggravation of inequality.
Equality of opportunity admits discrimination with reason and prohibits
discrimination without reason. Discrimination with reasons means rational
classification for differential treatment having nexus to the constitutional
permissible objects."

and where Article 29(2) is nothing more than a principle of equality, and when
"the whole object of conferring the right on minorities under Article 30 is to
ensure that there will be equality between the majority and the minority, if
the minorities do not have such special protection they will be denied
equality", it must follow that Article 29(2) is subject to the constitutional
classification of minorities under Article 30(1).

328\. Finally, there appears be an inherent contradiction in the statement of
the Court in St. Stephens that:

"the minority aided educational institutions are entitled to prefer their
community candidates to maintain the minority character of the institutions
subject of course to conformity with the University standard. The State may
regulate the intake in this category with due regard to the need of the
community in the area which the institution is intended to serve. But in no
case such intake shall exceed 50 per cent of the annual admission. The
minority institutions shall make available at least 50 per cent of the annual
admission to members of communities other than the minority community. The
admission of other community candidates shall be done purely on the basis of
merit." (p.614)

329\. I agree with the view as expressed by the Learned Chief Justice that
there is no question of fixing a percentage when the need may be variable. I
would only add that in fixing a percentage, the Court in St. Stephens in fact
"reserved" 50% of available seats in a minority institution for the general
category ostensible under Article 29(2). Article 29(2) pertains to the right
of an individual and is not a class right. It would therefore apply when an
individual is denied admission into any educational institution maintained by
the State or receiving aid from the State funds, solely on the basis of the
ground of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. It does not operate
to create a class interest or right in the sense that any educational
institution has to set apart for non-minorities as a class and without
reference to any individual applicant, a fixed percentage of available seats.
Unless Articles 30(1) and 29(2) are allowed to operate in their separate
fields then what started with the voluntary 'sprinkling' of outsiders, would
become a major inundation and a large chunk of the right of an aided minority
institution to operate for the benefit of the community it was set up to serve
would be washed away.

330\. Apart from this difference with the view expressed by the majority view
on the interpretation of Article 29(2) and Article 30(1). I am also unable to
concur in the mode of determining the need of a minority community for
admission to an educational institution set up by such community. Whether
there has been a violation of Article 29(2) in refusing admission to a non
minority student in a particular case must be resolved as it has been in the
past by recourse to the Courts. It must be emphasised that the right under
Article 29(2) is an individual one. If the non- minority student is otherwise
eligible for admission, the decision on the issue of refusal would depend on
whether the minority institution is able to establish that the refusal was
only because it was satisfying the requirements of its own community under
Article 30(1). I cannot therefore subscribe to the view expressed by the
majority that the requirement of the minority community for admission to a
minority educational institution should be left to the State or any other
Governmental authority to determine. If the Executive is given the power to
determine the requirements of the minority community in the matter of
admission to its educational institutions, we would be subjecting the minority
educational institution in question to an "intolerable encroachment" on the
right under Article 30(1) and let in by the back door as it were, what should
be denied entry altogether.

___________________________________________________________________________
S.N. Variava, J.

1\. We have had the advantage of going through the judgment of the learned
Chief Justice of India, brother justice Khare, brother Justice Quadri and
sister Justice Ruma Pal. We are unable to agree with the views expressed by
brother Justice Quadri and sister Justice Ruma Pal. The learned Chief Justice
has categorised the various questions into the following categories.

1) Is there a fundamental right to set up educational institutions and, if so,
under which provision;

2) Does the judgment in Unnikrichnan's case require reconsideration?

3) In case of private unaided institutions can there be Government regulations
and if so the what extent?

4) In determining the existence of a religious or linguistic minority, in
relation to Article 30, what is to be the unit, the State or Country as a
whole; and

5) To what extent the rights of aided minority institutions to administer be
regulated.

2\. Justice Khare has dealt with categories 4 and 5 above. On other aspects he
has agreed with the learned Chief Justice.

3\. We are in agreement with the reasoning and conclusion of the learned Chief
Justice on categories 1 and 4. In respect of category 2 we agree with the
learned Chief Justice that the cost incurred on educating a student in an
unaided professional college was more than the total fee which is realized on
the basis of the formula fixed in the scheme. This had resulted in revenue
shortfalls. As pointed out by the learned Chief Justice even though by a
subsequence decision (to Unni Krishnan's) this Court had permitted some
percentage of seats within the payment seats to be allotted to Non-Resident
Indians, against payment of a higher amount as determined by the authorities,
sufficient funds were still not available for the development of those
educational institutions. As pointed out by the learned Chief Justice
experience has shown that most of the "free seats" were occupied by students
from affluent families, while students from less affluent families were
required to pay much more to secure admission to "payment seats". As pointed
out by the learned Chief Justice the reason for this was that students from
affluent families had had better school education and the benefit of
professional coaching facilities and were, therefore, able to secure higher
merit positions in the common entrance test, and thereby secured the free
seats. The education of these more affluent students was in a way being cross-
subsidized by the financially poorer students who, because of their lower
position in the merit list, could secure only "Payment seats". Thus we agree
with the conclusion of the learned Chief Justice that the scheme cannot be
considered to be a reasonable restriction and requires reconsideration and
that the regulations must be minimum. However we cannot lose sight of the
ground realities in our country. The majority of our population come from the
poorer section of our society. They cannot and will not be able to afford the
fees which will now be fixed pursuant to the judgment. There must therefore be
an attempt, not just on the part of the Government and the State, but also by
the educational institutions to ensure that students from the poorer section
of society get admission. One method would be by making available scholarships
or free seats. If the educational institution is willing to provide free seats
then the costs of such free seats could also be partly covered by the fees
which are now to be fixed. There should be no harm in the rich subsidising the
poor.

4\. The learned Chief Justice has repeatedly emphasised that capitation fees
cannot be charged and that there must be no profiteering. We clarify that the
concerned authorities will always be entitled to prevent by enactment or by
regulations the charging of exorbitant fees or capitation fees. There are many
such enactments already in force. We have not gone not the validity or
otherwise of any such enactment. No arguments regarding the validity of any
such enactment have been submitted before us. Thus those enactments will not
be deemed to have been set aside by this judgment. Of course now by virtue of
this judgment the fee structure fixed under any regulation or enactment will
have to be reworked so as to enable educational institutions not only to break
even but also to generate some surplus for future development/expansion and to
provide for free seats.

5\. We also wish to emphasis, what has already been stated by the learned
Chief Justice, that an educational institution must grant admission on some
identifiable and acceptable manner. It is only in exceptional cases, that the
management may refuse admission to a student. However, such refusal must not
be whimsical or for extraneous reasons meaning thereby that the refusal must
be based on some cogent and justifiable reasons.

6\. In respect of categories 3 and 5 we wish to point out that this Court has
been constantly taking the view that these aided educational institutions
(whether majority or minority) should not have unfettered freedom in the
matter of administration and management. The State which gives aid to
educational institution including minority educational institution can impose
such conditions as are necessary for the proper maintenance for the higher
standards of education. State is also under an obligation to protect the
interests of the teaching and non-teaching staff. In many States, there are
various statutory provisions to regulate the functioning of these educational
institutions. Every educational institution should have basic amenities. If it
is a school, it should have healthy surroundings for proper education; it
should have a playground, a laboratory, a library and other requisite
facilities that are necessary for a proper functioning of the school. The
teachers who are working in the schools should be governed by proper service
conditions. In States where the entire pay and allowances for the teaching
staff and non-teaching staff are paid by the State, the State has got ample
power to regulate the method of selection and appointment of teachers. State
can also prescribe qualifications for the teachers to be appointed in such
schools. Similarly in an aided schools, State sometimes provides aid for some
of the teachers only while denying the aid to other teachers. Sometimes the
State does not provide aid for the non-teaching staff. The State could, when
granting aid, provides for the age and qualifications or recruitment of a
teacher, the age of retirement and even for the manner in which an enquiry has
to be held by the institution. In other words there could be regulations which
ensure that service conditions for teachers and staff receiving aid of the
State and the teachers or the staff for which no aid is being provided are the
same. Pre-requisite to attract good teachers is to have good service
conditions. To bring about an uniformity in the service conditions State
should be put at liberty to prescribe the same without intervening in the
process of selection of the teachers or their removal, dismissal etc. We agree
that there need not be either prior and subsequent approval from any
functionaries of the State/University/Board (as the case may be) for
disciplinary action, removal or dismissal. However principles of natural
justice must be observed and as already provided, by the learned Chief Justice
all such action can be scrutinised by the Eduction Tribunal. The provisions
contained in the various enactments are not specially challenged before us.
The constitutional validity of the statutory provisions vis-a- vis the rights
under Articles 19(1)(g), Article 26, Article 29 and Article 30(1) of the
Constitution can be examined only if a specific case is brought before the
Court. Educational Institution receiving State aid cannot claim to have
complete autonomy in the matter of administration. They are found by various
statutory provisions which are enacted to protect the interests of the
education, students and teachers. Many of the Statutes were enacted long back
and stood the test of time. Nobody has ever challenged the provisions of these
enactments. The regulations made by the State, to a great extent, depend on
the extent of the aid given to institutions including minority institutions.
In some States, a lumpsum amount is paid as grant for maintenance of schools.
In such cases, the State may not be within its right to impose various
restrictions, specially regarding selection and appointment of teachers. But
in some States the entire salary of the teaching and non-teaching staff are
paid, and these employees are given pension and other benefits, the State may
then have a right and an obligation to see that the selection and appointment
of teachers are properly made. Similarly the State could impose conditions to
the effect that in the matter of appointments, preference shall be given to
weaker sections of the community, specially physically handicapped or
dependents of employees who died in harness. All such regulations may not be
said to be bad ad/or invalid and may not even amount to infringing the rights
of the minority conferred under Article 30(1) of the Constitution. Statutory
provisions such as labour laws and welfare legislations etc. would be
applicable to minority educational institutions. As this decision is being
rendered by a larger bench consisting of eleven judges, we feel that it is not
advisable and we should not be taken to have laid down extensive guidelines in
respect of myriads of legal questions that may arise for consideration. In our
view in this case the battlelines were not drawn up in the correct perspective
and many of the aggrieved or affected parties were not before us.

7\. As regards category 5, we agree with the conclusion of both the learned
Chief Justice as well as Justice Khare that Article 29(2) applies to Article
30. However, we are unable to agree with the final reasoning that there must
be a balancing between Articles 29(2) and 30(1). We, therefore, give our
reasons for dis-agreeing with the final conclusion that there must be a
balancing between Articles 29(2) and 30.

8\. We are conscious of the fact that the learned Chief Justice and Justice
Khare have exhaustively dealt with the authorities. However, in our view there
is need to emphasise the same. We are here called upon to interpret Articles
29(2) and 30. Submissions have been made that in interpreting these Articles
the historical background must be kept in mind and that a contextual approach
should be taken. We must, therefore, a) look at the history which led to
incorporation of these Articles. The intention of the framers will then
disclose how the contextual approach must be based; b) apply the well settled
principles of interpretation; and c) keep the doctrine of "State Decisis" in
mind.

9\. In the case of Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, it has been held
that in interpreting the provisions of a Statute or the Constitution it is the
duty of the Court to find out the legislative intent. It has been held that
Constituent Assembly debates are not conclusive but that, in a Constitutional
matter where the intent of the framers of the Constitution is to be
ascertained, the Court should look into the proceedings and the relevant data,
including the speeches, which throw light on ascertaining the intent. In
considering the nature and extent of rights conferred on minorities one must
keep in mind the historical background and see how and for what purpose
Article 30 was framed.

10\. In the case of R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay reported in AIR (1984) SC 684
at page 686, it has been held as follows:

"Reports of the Committee which preceded the enactment of a legislation,
reports of Joint Parliament Committee, report of a Commission set up for
collecting information leading to the enactment are permissible external aid
to construction. If the basic purpose underlying construction of legislation
is to ascertain the real intention of the Parliament, why should the aids
which Parliament availed of such as report of a Special Committee preceding
the enactment, existing state of Law, the environment necessitating enactment
of legislation, and the object sought to be achieved, be denied to Court whose
function is primarily to give effect to the real intention of the Parliament
in enacting the legislation. Such denial would deprive the Court of a
substantial and illuminating aid to construction.

The modern approach has to a considerable extent eroded the exclusionary rule
even in England."

11\. The partition of India caused great anguish, pain, bitterness and
distrust amongst the various communities residing in India. Initially there
was a demand for separate electorate and reservation of seats. However the
principle of unity and equality for all prevailed. In return it was agreed
that minorities would be given special protections.

12\. The reason why Article 30(1) was embodied in the Constitution has been
set out by Chief Justice Ray (as he then was) in the case of St. Xaviers
College v. State of Gujarat. The relevant portion reads as follows: "The right
to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice has been
conferred on religious and linguistic minorities so that the majority who can
always having their rights by having proper legislation do not pass a
legislation prohibiting minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice.

    
    
    xxx                xxx                xxx
    xxx                xxx                xxx xxx xxx xxx
    

Every section of the public, the majority as well as minority has rights in
respect of religion as contemplated in Articles 25 and 26 and rights in
respect of language, script, culture as contemplated in Article 29. The whole
object of conferring the right on minorities under Article 30 is to ensure
that there will be equality between the majority and the minority. If the
minorities do not have such special protection they will be denied equality.

    
    
    xxx                xxx                xxx
    xxx                xxx                xxx xxx xxx xxx
    

The real reason embodied in Article 30(1) of the Constitution is the
conscience of the nation that the minorities, religious as well as linguistic,
are not prohibited from establishing and administering educational
institutions of their choice for the purpose of giving their children the best
general education to make them complete men and women of the country. The
minorities are given this protection under Article 30 in order to preserve and
strengthen the integrity and unity of the country. The sphere of general
secular education is intended to develop the commonness of boys and girls of
our country. this is in the true spirit of liberty, equality and fraternity
through the medium of education. If religious or linguistic minorities are not
given protection under Article 30 to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice, they will feel isolated and separate. General
secular education will open doors of perception and act as the natural light
of mind for our countrymen to live in the whole." (emphasis supplied) In the
same Judgment, Justice Khanna has held as follows: "Before we deal with the
contentions advanced before us and the scope and ambit of Article 30 of the
Constitution, it may be pertinent to refer to the historical background. India
is the second most populous country of the world. The people inhabiting this
vast land profess different religions and speak different languages. Despite
the diversity of religion and language, there runs through the fabric of the
nation the golden thread of a basic innate unity. It is a mosaic of different
religions, languages and cultures. Each of them has made a mark on the Indian
polity and India today represents a synthesis of them all. The closing years
of the British rule were marked by communal riots and dissentions. There was
also a feeling of distrust and the demand was made by a section of the Muslims
for a separate homeland. This ultimately resulted in the partition of the
country. Those who led the fight for independence in India always laid great
stress on communal amity and accord. They wanted the establishment of a
secular State wherein people belonging to the different religions should all
have a feeling of equality and non-discrimination. Demand had also been made
before the partition by sections of people belonging to the minorities for
reservation of seats and separate electorates. In order to bring about
integration and fusion of the different sections of the population, the
framers of the Constitution did away with separate electorates and introduced
the system of joint electorates, so that every candidate in an election should
have to look for support of all sections of the citizens. Special safeguards
were guaranteed for the minorities and they were made a part of the
fundamental rights with a view to instil a sense of confidence and security in
the minorities. Those provisions were a king of a Charter of rights for the
minorities so that none might have the feeling that any section of the
population consisted of first-class citizens and the others of second-class
citizens. (emphasis supplied)

13\. This was the basis on which minority rights were guaranteed. The rights
were created so that minorities need have no apprehension that they would not
be able, either in the religious or in the educational fields, to do what the
politically powerful majority could do. In matters of education what the
politically powerful majority could do was to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice at their own expense. Principles of
equality required that the minorities be given the same rights. The
protection/special right was to ensure that the minorities could also
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice at their own
expense. The demand for separatism and separate electorates was given up as
principles of secularism and equality were considered more important. The
principle of secularism and equality meant that State would not discriminate
on grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. Thus once State
aid was given and/or taken then, whether majority or minority, all had to
adhere to principles of equality and secularism. There never was any intention
or desire to create a special or privileged class of citizens.

14\. With this background, it is necessary to see how Articles 29 and 30 came
to be framed/incorporated in the Constitution. Mr. Munshi was a strong
advocate for minority rights. Mr. Munshi sent to the Advisory Committee a Note
with which he forwarded a draft Constitution. This draft Constitution clearly
indicates what rights were contemplated in framing, what is now, Article 30(1)
Draft Article VI read as follows:

"The Right to Religious and Cultural Freedom (1) All citizens are equally
entitled to freedom of conscience and to the right freely to profess and
practise religion in a manner compatible with public order, morality or health
:

Provided that the economic, financial or political activities associated with
religious worship shall not be deemed to be included in the right to profess
or practise religion.

(2) All citizens are entitled to cultural freedom, to the use of their mother
tongue and the script thereof, and to adopt, study or use any other language
and script of their choice.

(3) Citizens belonging to national minorities in a State whether based on
religion or language have equal rights with other citizens in forming,
controlling and administering at their own expense, charitable, religious and
social institutions, schools and other educational establishments with the
free use of their language and practice of their religion. (emphasis supplied.

(4) No person may be compelled to pay taxes the proceeds of which are
specifically appropriated in payment of religious requirements of any
community of which he is not a member.

(5) Religious instruction shall not be compulsory for a member of a community
which does not profess such religion.

(6) No person under the age of eighteen shall be free to change his religious
persuasion without the permission of his parent or guardian. (7) Conversion
from one religion to another brought about by coercion, undue influence or the
offering of material inducement is prohibited and is punishable by the law of
the Union.

(8) It shall be the duty of every unit to provide, in the public educational
system in towns and districts in which a considerable proportion of citizens
of other than the language of the unit are residents, adequate facilities for
ensuring that in the primary schools the instruction shall be given to the
children of such citizens through the medium of their own language.

Nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the unit from making the
teaching of the national language in the variant and script of the choice of
the pupil obligatory in the schools.

(9) No legislation providing State-aid for schools shall discriminate against
schools under the management of minorities whether based on religion or
language.

Every monument of artistic or historic interest or place of natural interest
throughout the Union is guaranteed immunity from spoliation, destruction,
removal, disposal or export except under a law of the Union, and shall be
preserved and maintained according to the law or the Union." This shows that
the intention was to give to the minorities the right to form, control and
administer, amongst others educational institutions, at their own expense. It
is also to be noted that Article (9) is similar to what is now Article 30(2).
As the educational institutions were to be at their own expense, State aid was
not made compulsory.

15\. At this stage it must be remembered that the minorities to whom rights
were being given, were not minorities who were socially and/or economically
backward. There was no fear that economically, these religious or linguistic
minorities, would not be able to establish and administer educational
institution. There was also no fear that, in educational Institutions
established for the benefit of all citizens, the children of these religious
or linguistic minorities would not be able to compete. These rights were being
conferred only to ensure that the majority, who due to their numbers would be
politically powerful, did not prevent the minorities from establishing and
administering their own educational institutions. In so providing, the basic
feature of the Constitution, namely, secularism and equality for all citizens,
whether majority or minority was being kept in mind.

16\. In this behalf, an extract from Kesavananda's case is very relevant. It
reads as follows:

"It may be recalled that as regards the minorities the Cabinet Mission had
recognised in their report to the British Cabinet on May 6, 1946, only three
main communities: general, Muslims and Sikhs. General community included all
those who were non-Muslims or non-Sikhs. The Mission had recommended an
Advisory Committee to be set up by the Constituent Assembly which was to frame
the rights of citizens, minorities, tribals and excluded areas. The Cabinet
Mission statement had actually provided for the cession of sovereignty to the
Indian people subject only to two matters which were: (1) willingness to
conclude a treaty with His Majesty's Government to cover matters arising out
of transfer of power and (2) adequate provisions for the protection of the
minorities. Pursuant to the above and Paras 5 and 6 of the Objectives
Resolution the Constituent Assembly set up an Advisory Committee on January
24, 1947. The Committee was to consist of representatives of muslims, the
depressed classes or the scheduled castes, the Sikhs, Christians, Parsis,
Anglo-Indians, tribals and excluded areas besides the Hindus. As a historical
fact it is safe to say that at a meeting held on May 11, 1949, a resolution
for the abolition of all reservations for minorities other than the scheduled
castes found whole- hearted support from an overwhelming majority of the
members of the Advisory Committee. So far as the schedule castes were
concerned it was felt that their peculiar position would necessitate special
reservation for them for a period of ten years. It would not be wrong to say
that the separate representation of minorities which had been the feature of
the previous Constitutions and which had witnesses so much of communal tension
and strife was given up in favour of joint electorates in consideration of the
guarantee of fundamental rights and minorities' rights which it was decided to
incorporate into the new Constitution. The Objectives Resolution can be taken
into account as a historical fact which moulded its nature and character.
Since the language of the Preamble was taken from the resolution itself the
declaration in the Preamble that India would be a Sovereign Democratic
Republic which would secure to all its citizens justice, liberty and equality
was implemented in Parts III and IV and other provisions of Constitution.
These formed not only the essential features of the Constitution but also the
fundamental conditions upon and the basis on which the various groups and
interest adopted the Constitution as the Preamble hoped to create one unified
integrated community. (emphasis supplied)"

17\. The draft Articles were then forwarded by the Advisory Committee to a
Committee for fundamental rights. They were also forwarded to another
Committee known as the Committee of Minorities. These two Committees
thereafter revised the draft and the revised draft was then forwarded to the
Constituent Assembly for discussion. The relevant portion of the revised draft
read as follows:

"Rights relating to Religion

13\. All persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience, and the right
freely to profess, practise and propagate religion subject to public order,
morality or health and to the other provisions of this Part. Explanation 1. -
The wearing the carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be included in the
profession of the Sikh religion.

Explanation 2. - The above rights shall not include any economic, financial,
political or other secular activities that may be associated with religious
practice.

Explanation 3. - The freedom of religious practice guaranteed in this clause
shall not debar the State from enacting laws for the purpose of social welfare
and reform and for throwing open Hindu religious institutions of a public
character to any class or section of Hindus.

14\. Every religious denomination or a section thereof shall have the right to
manage its own affairs in matters of religion and, subject to law, to own,
acquire and administer property, movable and immovable, and to establish and
maintain institutions for religious or charitable purposes.

15\. No person may be compelled to pay taxes, the proceeds of which are
specifically appropriated to further or maintain any particular religion or
denomination.

16\. No person attending any school maintained or receiving aid out of public
funds shall be compelled to take part in the religious instruction that may be
given in the school or to attend religious worship held in the school or in
premises attached thereto.

17\. Conversion from one religion to another brought about by coercion or
undue influence shall not be recognised by law.

Cultural and Educational Rights

18\. (1) Minorities in every unit shall be protected in respect of their
language, script and culture, and no laws or regulations may be enacted that
may operate oppressively or prejudicially in this respect. (2) No minority
whether based on religion, community or language shall be discriminated
against in regard to the admission into State educational institutions, nor
shall any religious instruction be compulsorily imposed on them.

(3)(a). All minorities whether based on religion, community or language shall
be free in any unit to establish and administer educational institutions of
their choice.

(b) The State shall not, while providing State aid to schools, discriminate
against schools under the management or minorities whether based on religion,
community or language."

Thus under Clause 18(3)(a) minorities based on religion, community and
language were to be free to establish and administer educational institutions.
The Constituent Assembly Debates, of 30th August, 1947, indicate that it was
understood and clear that the right to establish and administer educational
institutions was to be at their own expense. During the Debate on 30th August,
1947, Mr. K.T.M. Ahmed Ibrahim Sahib Bahadur proposed an amendment in Clause
18(2). The suggested amendment read as follows:

"Provided that this clause does not apply to state Educational institutions
maintained mainly for the benefit of any particular community or section of
the people."

18\. Similarly Mrs. Purnima Banerji proposed an amendment to the effect that
under Clause 18(2) after the words "state" the words "and State-aided" be
inserted. To be noted that both Mr. K.T.M. Ahmed and Mrs. Purnima Banerji
were, by their proposed amendments, seeking to enhance rights of minorities.
The discussions which follow these proposed amendments are very illustrative
and informative. These discussions read as follows: "Mrs. Purnima Banerji:
Sir, my amendment is to clause 18(2). It reads as follows:-

"That after the word 'State', the words 'and State-aided' be inserted." The
purpose of the amendment is that no minority, whether based on community or
religion shall be discriminated against in regard to the admission into State-
aided and State educational institutions. Many of the provinces, e.g., U.P.,
have passed resolutions laying down that no educational institution will
forbid the entry of any members of any community merely on the ground that
they happened to belong to a particular community - even if that institution
is maintained by a donor who has specified that that institution should only
cater for members of his particular community. If that institution seeks State
aid, it must allow members of other communities to enter into it. In the olden
days, in the Anglo-Indian schools (it was laid down that, though those school
were specifically intended for Anglo-Indians, 10 per cent of the seats should
be given to Indians. In the latest report adopted by this House, it is laid
down at 40 per cent. I suggest Sir, that if this clause is included without
the amendment in the Fundamental Rights, it will be a step backward and many
Provinces who have taken a step forward will have to retract their steps. We
have many institutions conducted by very philanthropic people, who have left
large sums of money at their disposal. While we welcome such donations, when a
principle has been laid down that, if any institution receives State aid, it
cannot discriminate or refuse admission to members of other communities, then
it should be followed. We know, Sir, that many a Province has got provincial
feelings. If this provision is included as a fundamental right, I suggest that
it will be highly detrimental. The Honourable Mover has not told us what was
the reason why he specifically excluded State-aided institutions from this
clause. If he had explained it, probably the House would have been convinced.
I hope that all the educationists and other members of this House will support
my amendment (emphasis supplied) Even though Mrs. Purnima Banerji is seeking
to give further protection to students of minority community, her speech
indicates the principle, accepted by all, that if an institute receives State
aid it cannot discriminate or refuse admission to members of other
communities. the reply of Mr. Munshi is as follows:-

Mr. K.M. Munshi: Mr. President, Sir, the scope of this Clause 18(2) is only
restricted to this, that where the State has got an educational institution of
its own, no minority shall be discriminated against. Now, this does recognise
to some extent the principle that the State cannot own an institution from
which a minority is excluded. As a matter of fact, this to some extent
embodies the converse proposition over which discussion took place on Clause
16, namely no minority shall be excluded from any school maintained by the
State. That being so, it secures the purpose which members discussed a few
minutes ago. This is the farthest limit to which I think, a fundamental right
can go.

Regarding Ibrahim Sahib's amendment, I consider that it practically destroys
the whole meaning and content of this fundamental right. This minority right
is intended to prevent majority control legislatures from favouring their own
community to the exclusion of other communities. The question therefore is :
Is it suggested that the State should be at liberty to endow schools for
minorities? Then it will come to this that the minority will be a favoured
section of the public. This destroys the very basis of a fundamental right. I
submit that it should rejected. (emphasis supplied) xxx xxx xxx Then comes
Mrs. Banerji's amendment. it is wider than the clause itself. As I pointed
out, Clauses 16 to 18 are really two different propositions. This is with
regard to communities. Through the medium of a fundamental right, not by
legislation, not by administrative action this amendment seeks to close down
thousands of institutions in this country. I can mention one thing so far as
my province is concerned there are several hundreds of Hindu Schools and
several dozens of Muslim Schools. Many of them are run by charities which are
exclusively Hindu or Muslim. Still the educational policy of the State during
the Congress regime has been that as far as possible no discrimination should
be permitted against any pupil by administrative action in these schools.
Whenever a case of discrimination is found, the Educational Inspector goes
into it; particularly with regard to Harijans it has been drastically done in
the Province of Bombay. Now if you have a fundamental right like this, a
school which has got a thousand students and receives Rs. 500 by way of grant
from Government, becomes a State aided School. A trust intended for one
community maintains the School and out of Rs. 50,000 spent for the School Rs.
500 only comes from Government as grant. But immediately the Supreme Court
must hold that this right comes into operation as regards this School. Now
this, as I said, can best be done by legislation in the provinces, through the
administrative action of the Government which takes into consideration
susceptibilities and sometimes makes allowances for certain conditions. How
can you have a Fundamental law about this? How can you divert crores of rupees
of trust for some other purpose by a stroke of the pen? The idea seems to be
that by placing these two lines in the constitution everything in this country
has to be changed without even consulting the people or without even allowing
the legislatures to consider it. I submit that looking into the present
conditions it is much better that these things should be done by the normal
process of educating the people rather than by putting in a Fundamental Right.
This clause is intended to be restrictive that neither the Federation nor a
unit shall maintain an institution from which minorities are excluded. If we
achieve this, this will be a very great advance that we would have made and
the House should be content with this much advance."

Thus to be seen that Mr. Munshi echoed the sentiment so often expressed by
Counsel before us i.e. that by securing a small amount of aid, the right to
administer educational institutions cannot be given up. This was immediately
answered as follows:

"Mr. Hussain Imam : I will not take more than two minutes of the time of the
House. I think there is nothing wrong with the amendment which has been moved
by Mrs. Banerji. She neither wants those endowed institutions to be closed,
nor their funds to be diverted to purposes for which they were not intended.
What she does ask is that the State being a secular State, must not ge a party
to exclusion. It is open to the institutions which want to restrict admission
to particular communities or particular classes, to refuse State aid and
thereby, after they have refused to State aid, they are free to restrict their
admission of the students to any class they like. The State will have no say
in the matter. Here the word 'recognize' has not been put in. In Clause 16 we
put the all embracing word 'recognize'. Therefore all this trouble arose that
we had to refer that to a small Committee. In this clause the position is very
clear. And Mr. Munshi, as a clever lawyer, has tried to cloud this. It is open
to the institution which has spent Rs. 40,000 from its funds not to receive
Rs. 500 as grant from the State but it will be open to the State to declare
that as a matter of State policy exclusiveness must not be accepted and this
would apply equally to the majority institutions as well as minority
institutions. No institution receiving State aid should close its door to any
other class of persons in India merely because its donor has originally so
desired to restrict. They are open to refuse the State aid and they can have
any restriction they like. (emphasis supplied) xxx xxx xxx Pandit Hirday Nath
Kunzru : Mr. President, I support the amendment moved by Mrs. Banerji. I
followed with great interest Mr. Munshi's exposition. His view was that if we
accepted the principle that educational institutions maintained by the State
shall be bound to admit boys of all communities, it would be a great gain and
that we should not mix up this matter with other matters howsoever important
they may be. I appreciate his view point. Nevertheless I think that it is
desirable in view of the importance that we have attached to various
provisions accepted by us regarding the development of a feeling of unity in
the country that we should today accept the principle that a boy shall be at
liberty to join any school whether maintained by the State or by any private
agency which receives aid from State funds. No school should be allowed to
refuse to admit a boy on the score of his religion. This does not mean, Sir,
as Mr. Munshi seems to think, that the Headmaster of any school would be under
a compulsion to admit any specified number of boys belonging to any particular
community. Take for instance an Islamia School. If 200 Hindu boys offer
themselves for admission to that School, the Headmaster will be under no
obligation to admit all of them. But the boys will not be debarred, from
seeking admission to it simply because they happen to be Hindus. The
Headmaster will lay down certain principles in order to determine which boys
should be admitted.

xxx xxx xxx Sir, we have decided not to allow separate representation in order
to create a feeling of oneness throughout the country. We have even disallowed
cumulative voting because, as Sardar Vallabhabhai Patel truly stated the other
day, its acceptance would mean introduction by the backdoor of the dangerous
principle of communal electorates which we threw out of the front door. So
great being the importance that we attach to the development of a feeling of
nationalism, is it not desirable and it is not necessary that our educational
institutions which are maintained or aided by the State should not cater
exclusively for boys belonging to any particular religion or community? If it
is desirable in the case of adults that a feeling of unity should be created,
is it not much more desirable where immature children and boys are concerned
that no principle should be accepted which would allow the dissemination,
directly or indirectly, of anti-national ideas or feelings?

Sir, since the future welfare of every State depends on education, it is I
think very important that we should today firmly lay down the principle that a
school, even though it may be a private school, should be open to the children
of all communities if it receives aid from Government. This principle will be
in accordance with the decisions that we have arrived at on other matters so
far. Its non-acceptance will be in conflict with the general view regarding
the necessity of unity which we have repeatedly and emphatically expressed in
this House. (emphasis supplied) These discussions clearly indicate that the
main emphasis was on unity and equality. The protection which was being given
to the minorities was merely to ensure that the politically strong majority
did not prevent the minorities from having educational institutions at their
own expense. It is clear that the framers always intended that the principles
of secularism and equality were to prevail over even minorities' rights. If
the State aid was taken then there could be no discrimination or refusal to
admit members of other communities. On this basis the amendments moved by Mr.
K.T.M. Ahmed Ibrahim Sahib Bahadur and Mrs. Purnima Banerji (which sought to
create additional rights in favour of minorities) were rejected.

19\. The draft was taken sent back to the Committee. When it came back to the
Constituent Assembly the relevant Articles read as follows: "22. (1) No
religious instruction shall be provided by the State in any educational
institution wholly maintained out of State funds: Provided that nothing in
this clause shall apply to an educational institution which is administered by
the State but has been established under any endowment or trust which requires
that religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution.

(2) No person attending any education Institution recognised by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any
religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend
any religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any
premises attached thereto unless such person, or if such person is a minor,
his guardian has given his consent thereto.

(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent any community or denomination from
providing religious instruction for pupils of that community or denomination
in an educational institution outside its working hours. Cultural and
educational rights

23\. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any
part thereof having a distinct language, script and culture of its own shall
have the right to conserve the same.

(2) No minority whether based on religion, community or language shall be
discriminated against the regard to the admission of any person belonging to
such minority into any educational institution maintained by the State. (3)(a)
All minorities whether based on religion, community or language shall have the
right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.

(b) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions,
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is
under the management of a minority, whether based on religion, community or
language.

20\. These were discussed in the Constituent Assembly on 7th and 8th December,
1948. It must be noted that there was a practice to circulate in advance, any
proposed amendment, which a Member desired to move. The proposed amendment was
circulated in advance for sound reasons, namely that every body else would
have notice of it and be prepared to express views for or against the proposed
amendment. On 7th December, 1948 Clause 22 was being considered, Mr. H.V.
Kamath proposed as follows: "Shri H.V. Kamath (C.P. and Berar : General). Mr.
Vice President, I move- "That in Clause (2) of Article 22, the words
"recognised by the State or" be deleted."

I move this amendment with a view to obtaining some clarification on certain
dark corners of these two articles - Articles 22 and 23. I hope that my
learned Friend Dr. Ambedkar will not, in his reply, merely toe the line of
least resistance and say "I oppose this amendment", but will be good enough to
give some reasons why he opposes or rejects my amendment, and I hope he will
try his best to throw some light on the obscure corners of this article. If we
scan the various clauses of this article carefully and turn a sidelong glance
at the next articles too, we will find that there are some inconsistencies or
at least an inconsistency. Clause (1) of Article 22 imposes an absolute ban on
religious instruction in institutions which are wholly maintained out of State
funds. The proviso, however, excludes such institutions as are administered by
the State which have been established under an endowment or trust - that is,
under the proviso those institutions which have been established under an
endowment or trust and which require, under the conditions of the trust, that
religious instruction must be provided in those institutions, about those,
when the State administers then, there will not be any objection to religious
instruction. Clause (2) lays down that no person attending an institution
recognised by the State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required
to take part in religious instruction. The means, it would not be compulsory.
I am afraid I will have to turn to Clause 23, Sub-clause (3)

(a) where it is said that all minorities, whether based on religion, community
or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice. Now, is it intended that the institutions
referred to in the subsequent clause which minorities may establish and
conduct and administer according to their own choice, is it intended that in
these institutions the minorities would not be allowed to provide religious
instruction? There may be institutions established by minorities, which insist
on students' attendance at religious classes in those institutions and which
are otherwise unobjectionable. There is no point about State aid, but I cannot
certainly understand why the State should refuse recognition to those
institutions established by minorities where they insist on compulsory
attendance at religious classes. Such interference by the State I feel is
unjustified and unnecessary. Besides, this conflicts with the next article to
a certain extent. If minorities have the right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their own choice, is it contended by the
Honourable Dr. Ambedkar that the State will say "You can have institutions,
but you should not have religious instructions in them if you want our
recognition'. Really it beats me how you can reconcile these two points of
view in Articles 22 and

23\. The minority, as I have already said, may establish such a school or its
own pupils and make religious instruction compulsory in that school. If you do
not recognise that institution, then certainly that school will not prosper
and it will fail at attract pupils. Moreover, we have guaranteed certain
rights to the minorities and, it may be in a Christian School, they may teach
the pupils the Bible and in a Muslim school the Koran. If the minorities,
Christians and Muslims, can administer those institutions according to their
choice and manner, does the House mean to suggest that the State shall not
recognize such institutions? Sir, to my mind, if you pursue such a course, the
promises we have made to the minorities in our country, the promises we have
made to the ear we shall have broken to the heart. Therefore I do not see any
point why, in institutions that are maintained and conducted and administered
by the minorities for pupils of their own community the State should refuse to
grant recognition, in case religious instruction is compulsory. When once you
have allowed them to establish schools according to their choice, it is
inconsistent that you should refuse recognition to them on that ground. I hope
something will be done to rectify this inconsistency."

Thus it is to be seen that Shri H.V. Kamath is referring not just to draft
Article 22 but also to draft Article 23(3)(a). He is pointing out that there
is an apparent conflict between these two Articles. Draft Articles 22 and
23(3)

(a) are, with minor changes, what are now Articles 28(3) and 30(1). Dr.
Ambedkar opposed the amendments proposed by Shri H.V. Kamath for various
reasons, one of which is as follows:

"We have accepted the proposition which is embodied in Article 21, that public
funds raised by taxes shall not be utilised for the benefit of any particular
community."

21\. Shri H.V. Kamath then asked for a clarification as follows: "On a point
of clarification, what about institutions and schools run by a community or a
minority for its own pupils - not a school where all communities are mixed but
a school run by the community for its own pupils?"

22\. Thus Shri H.V. Kamath is again emphasising that there could be minority
educational institutions run for their own pupils. The answer to this, by Dr.
Ambedkar, is as follows:

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: If my Friend Mr. Kamath will read the other
article he will see that once an institution, whether maintained by the
community or not, gets a grant, the condition is that it shall keep the school
open to all communities, that provision he has not read." (emphasis supplied)

23\. To be noted that in the draft Articles there is no clause which provided
that if an institution, whether maintained by the community or not, gets a
grant, it shall keep the school open to all communities. The next clause which
Dr. Ambedkar referred to, was the proposed amendment moved by Pandit Thakur
Dass Bhargava. As stated above this proposed amendment had already been
circulated to all. It is clear that Dr. Ambedkar had already accepted the
proposal of Pandit Thakur Dass Bharvava.

24\. On 8th December, 1948, when Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava moved his
amendment, the debate read as follows:

"Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Sir, I beg to move.

That for amendment No. 687 of the List of amendments, the following be
substituted:-

"That for Clause (2) of Article 23, the following be substituted :- "(2) No
citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained
by the State or receiving aid out of State funds of grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them."

and Sub-clauses (a) and (b) of Clause (3) of Article 23 be renumbered and new
Article 23-A".

Sir, I find there are three points of difference between this amendment and
the provisions of the section which it seeks to amend. The first is to put in
the words 'no citizen' for the words 'no majority'. Secondly that not only the
institutions which are maintained by the State will be included in it, but
also such institutions as are receiving aid out of state funds. Thirdly, we
have, instead of the words "religion, community or language", the words,
"religion, race, caste, language or any of them". Now, Sir, it is happens that
the words "no minority" seeks to differentiate the minority from the majority,
whereas you would be pleased to see that in the Chapter the words of the
heading are "cultural and educational rights", so that the minority rights as
such should not find any place under this section. Now if we read Clause (2)
it would appear as if the minority had been given certain definite rights in
this clause, whereas the national interests require that no majority also
should be discriminated against in this matter. Unfortunately, there is in
some matters a tendency that the minorities as such possess and are given
certain special rights which are denied to the majority. It was the habit of
our English masters that they wanted to create discriminations of this sort
between the minority and the majority. Sometimes the minority said that they
were discriminated against and on other occasions the majority felt the same
thing. This amendment brings the majority and the minority on an equal status.
In educational matters, I cannot understand, from the national point of view,
how any discrimination can be justified in favour of a minority or a majority.
Therefore, what this amendment seeks to do is that the majority and the
minority are brought on the same level. There will be no discrimination
between any member of the minority or majority in so far as admission to
educational institutions are concerned. So I should say that this is a charter
of the liberties for the student-world of the minority and the majority
communities equally.

The second change which is amendment seeks to make is in regard to the
institutions which will be governed by this provision of law. Previously only
the educational institutions maintained by the State were included. This
amendment seeks to include such other institutions as are aided by State
funds. There are a very large number of such institutions, and in future, by
this amendment the rights of the minority have been broadened and the rights
of the majority have been secured. So this is a very healthy amendment and it
is a kind of nation-building amendment. Now, Sir, the word "community" is
sought to be removed from this provision because "community" has no meaning.
If it is a fact that the existence of a community is determined by some common
characteristic and all communities are covered by the words religion or
language, then "community" as such has no basis. So the word "community" is
meaningless and the words substituted are "race or caste". So this provision
is so broadened that on the score of caste, race, language, or religion no
discrimination can be allowed. My submission is that considering the matter
from all the standpoints, this amendment is one which should be accepted
unanimously by this House." (emphasis supplied)

25\. To be noted that the proposed Article 23(2) is now Article 29(2). It is
being incorporated in Article 23 which also contained what is now Article
30(1). Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava was proposing this amendment with the clear
intention that it should apply to minority educational institutions under,
what is now Article 30(1). The whole purpose is to further principles of
secularism and to see that in State maintained and State aided educational
institutions there was no distinction between majority or minority
communities. At this stage it must be noted that no contrary view was
expressed at all. Dr. Ambedkar then replied as follows: "The Honourable Dr.
B.R. Ambedkar: Sir, of the amendments which have been moved to Article 23, I
can accept amendment No. 26 to amendment No. 687 by Pandit Thakur Dass
Bhargava. I am also prepared to accept amendment No. 31 to amendment No. 690,
also moved by Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava."

26\. The amendment proposed by Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava was unanimously
accepted by the Constituent Assembly. This is how and why, what is now Article
29(2) was framed and incorporated. Clearly it was to govern all educational
institutions including minority educational institutions under what is now
Article 30(1). The final resolution is as follows: "Mr. Vice-President: The
question is:

That for Clause (2) of Articles 23, the following be substituted:- "No citizen
shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the
State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, language or any of them";

and Sub-clause (a) and (B) of Clause (3) of Article 23 be renumbered as new
Article 23-A.

The motion was adopted."

27\. A reading of the Constituent Assembly debates clearly show that the
intention of the framers of the Constitution was that Article 29(2) was to
apply to all educational institutions, including minority educational
institutions under Article 30.

28\. This being the historical background and the intention of the framers,
the contextual approach must also be one which gives effect to the minority
rights but which does not elevate them into a special or privileged class of
citizens. The contextual approach must therefore be that minorities have full
rights to establish and administer educational institution at their own costs,
but if they choose to take State aid they must then abide by the
Constitutional mandate of Article 29(2) and with principles of equality and
secularism.

29\. The same result follows if well settled principles of interpretation are
applied. It is settled law that if the language of the provision, being
considered, is plain and unambiguous the same must be given effect to,
irrespective of the consequences that may result or arise. It is also settled
law that while interpreting provisions of a Statute, if two interpretations
are possible, one which leads to no conflict between the various provisions
and another which leads to a conflict between the various provisions, then the
interpretation which leads to no conflict must always be accepted. As already
been seen, the intention of the framers of the Constitution is very clear. The
framers unambiguously and unanimously intended that rights given under Article
30(1) could be fully enjoyed so long as the educational institutions were
established and administered at their own costs and expense. Once State aid
was taken, then principles of equality and secularism, on which our
Constitution is based, were to prevail and admission could not be denied to
any student on grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

30\. A plain reading of Article 29(2) shows that it applies to "any
educational institution" maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State
funds. The words "any educational institution" takes within its ambit an
educational institution established under Article 30(1). It is to be
remembered that when Article 29(2) [i.e. Article 23(2)] was framed it was part
of the same Article which contained what is now Article 30(1). Thus it was
clearly meant to apply to Article 30(1) as well. Significantly Article 30
nowhere provides that the provisions of Article 29(2) would not apply to it.
Article 30(1) does not exclude the applicability of the provisions of Article
29(2) to educational institutions established under it. A plain reading of the
two Articles indicates that the rights given under Article 30(1) can be fully
exercised so long as no aid is taken from the State. It is for this reason
that Article 30 does not make it compulsory for a minority educational
institution to take aid or for the State to give it. All that Article 30(2)
provides is that the State in granting aid to educational institutions shall
not discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is
under the management of a minority. In cases where the State gives aid to
educational institutions the State would be bound by the Constitutional
mandate of Article 29(2) to ensure that no citizen is denied admission into
the educational institution on grounds of religion, race, caste, language or
any of them. By so insisting the State would not be discriminating against a
minority educational institution. It would only be performing the obligation
cast upon it by the Constitution of India.

31\. This interpretation is also supported by the wording of Article 30(2).
Article 30(2) merely provides that the State shall not discriminate on the
ground that it is under the management of a minority. To be noted that Article
30(2) does not provide that State shall not in granting aid impose any
condition which would restrict or abridge the rights guaranteed under Article
30(1). The framers were aware that when State aid was taken the principles of
equality and secularism, which are the basis of our Constitution, would have
to prevail. Clearly the framers of the Constitution considered the principle
of equality and secularism to be more important than the rights under Article
30(1). Thus in Article 30(2) it was advisedly not provided that rights under
Article 30(1) could not be restricted or abridged whilst granting aid. A plain
reading of Article 30(2) shows that the framers of the Constitution envisaged
that certain rights would get restricted and/or abridged when a minority
educational institute chose to receive aid. It must also be noted that when
property rights were deleted [by deletion of Article 19(1)(f)] the framers of
the Constitution realised that rights under Article 30(1) would get restricted
or abridged unless specifically protected. Thus Article 30(1A) was introduced.
Article 30(1A), unlike Article 30(2), specifically provides the acquisition of
property of a minority educational institute must be in a manner which does
not restrict or abrogate the rights under Article 30(1). When the framers so
intended they have specifically so provided. Significantly even after
Judgments of this Court (set out hereafter) which laid down that Article 29(2)
applied to Article 30(1), the framers have not amended Article 30 to provide
to the contrary.

32\. Even though a plain reading of Articles 29(2) and Article 30 leads to no
clash between the two Articles, it has been submitted by counsel on behalf of
minorities that the right to establish and administer educational institutions
be considered an absolute right and that by giving aid the State cannot impose
conditions which would restrict or abrogate and/or abridge, in any manner, the
right under Article 30(1). It has been submitted that the right to administer
educational institutions includes the right to admit students. It has been
submitted that the minorities, whether based on religion or language, have a
right to admit students of their community. It is submitted that this right is
not taken away or abridged because State aid is taken. It is submitted that
notwithstanding the plain language of Articles 29(2) and 30 it must be held
that the rights under Article 30(1) prevail over Article 29(2).

33\. To accept such an argument one would have to read into Article 30(2)
words to the effect "state cannot in granting aid lay down conditions which
would restrict, abridge or abrogate rights under Article 30(1)" or to read
into Article 30(1) words to the effect "notwithstanding the provisions of
Article 29(2)". Purposely no such words are used. A clash is sought to be
created between Article 30(1) and 29(2) when no such clash exists. The
interpretation sought to be given is on presumption that rights under Article
30(1) are absolute. As is set out in greater detail hereafter, every single
authority of this Court, for the past over 50 years, has held that the rights
under Article 30(1) are subject to restrictions. All counsel appearing for the
minority educational institutions conceded that rights under Article 30(1) are
subject to general secular laws of the country. If rights under Article 30(1)
are subject to other laws of the country it can hardly be argued that they are
not subject to a constitutional provision.

34\. The interpretation sought to be placed not only creates a clash between
Articles 29(2) and 30 but also between Article 30 and Article 15(1). Article
15(1) prohibits the State from discriminating against citizens on grounds only
of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. If the State
were to give aid to a minority educational institution which only admits
students of its community then it would be discriminating against other
citizens who cannot get admission to such institutions. Such an interpretation
would also lead to clash between Article 30 and Article 28(3). There may be a
religious minority educational institute set up to teach their own religion.
Such an institute may, if it is unaided, only admit students who are willing
to say their prayers. Yet once aid is taken such an institution cannot compel
any student to take part in religious instructions unless the student or his
parent consents. If Article 30(1) were to be read in a manner which permits
State aided minority educational institutions to admit students as per their
choice, then they could refuse to admit students who do not agree to take part
in religious instructions. The prohibition prescribed in Article 28(2) could
then be rendered superfluous and/or nugatory. Apart from rendering Article
28(2) nugatory such an interpretation would set up a very dangerous trend. All
minority educational institutions would then refuse to admit students who do
not agree to take part in religious instructions. In all fairness to all the
counsels appearing for minority educational institutions, it must be stated
that not a single counsel argued that Article 28(2) would not govern Article
30(1). All counsel fairly conceded that Article 30(1) would be governed by
Article 28(2). One fails to understand how Article 30(1) can be held to be
subject to Article 28(2) but not subject to Article 29(2).

35\. Accepting such an interpretation would also lead to an anomalous
situation. As is being held all citizens have a fundamental right to establish
and carry on an educational institution under Article 19(1)(g). An educational
institution can also be established and maintained under Article 26(a). An
educational institution could also be established under Article 29(1) for
purposes of conserving a distinct language, script or culture. All such
educational institutions would be governed by Article 29(2). Thus if a
religious educational institution is established under Article 26(a) it would
on receipt of State aid have to comply with Article 29(2). Similarly an
educational institute established for conserving a distinct language, script
or culture would, if it is receive State aid, have to comply with Article
29(2). Such institution would also have been established for benefit of their
own community or language or script or culture. If such educational
institutions have to comply with Article 29(2) it would be anomalous to say
that a religion or linguistic educational institution, merely because it is
set up by a minority need not comply with Article 29(2). The anomaly would be
greater because an educational institute set up under Article 26(a) would be
for teaching religion and an educational institute set up under Article 29(1)
would be for conserving a distinct language. On the other hand an educational
institute set up under Article 30(1) may be to give general secular education.
It would be anomalous to say that an educational institute set up to teach
religion or to conserve a distinct language, script or culture has to comply
with Article 29(2) but an educational institute set up to give general secular
education does not have to comply with Article 29(2). It must again be
remembered that Article 30 was not framed to create a special or privileged
class of citizens. It was framed only for purposes of ensuring that the
politically powerful majority did not prevent the minority from having their
educational institute. We cannot give to Article 30(1) a meaning which would
result in making the minorities, whether religious or linguistic, a special or
privileged class of citizens. We should give to Article 30(1) a meaning which
would further the basic and overriding principles of our Constitution viz.
equality and secularism. The interpretation must not be one which would create
a further divide between citizen and citizen.

36\. It has also been submitted that a minority educational institute would
have been established only for the purpose of giving education to students of
that particular religious or linguistic community. It has been submitted that
if Article 29(2) were to apply then the very basis of establishing such an
educational institution would disappear once State aid is taken. Whilst
considering such a submission one must keep in mind that the desire to
establish educational or other institutions for the benefit of students of
their own community would be there not only in minority communities. Such a
desire would be there in all citizens and communities, whether majority or
minority. If the majority communities, whether religious or linguistic, can
establish and administer educational institutions for their own community at
their own costs why should the position be different for minorities. If an
educational institute established by a majority community for members of that
community only, takes States aid, it would then lose the right to admit only
students of its own community. it would have to comply with the Constitutional
mandate of Article 29(2). The position is no different for an educational
institute established by a minority. The basic feature of our Constitution is
equality and secularism. It follows that the minority cannot be a more
privileged class or section of citizen. At the cost of repetition it is again
emphasised that Article 30 does not deal with minorities who are economically
or socially backward. These are not communities whose children are not capable
of competing on merit, e.g. a Tamilian in Tamil competes with others and gets
admission on merit. Even when he/she shifts to Maharashtra he/she continues to
be able to compete openly and get admission on merit. Merely because a
Tamilian shifts to Maharashtra or some other State does not mean that Tamilian
becomes a citizen entitled to special privilege or rights not available to
other citizens. This was not the purpose or object of Article 30. Article 30
was framed only to ensure that the Maharashtrians, by reason of their being
politically powerful, do not prevent the Tamilian from establishing an
educational institution at their own cost. Article 20 merely protects the
right of the minority to establish and administer an educational institution,
i.e. to have the same rights as those enjoyed by majority. Article 30 gives no
right to receive State aid. It is for the institution to decide whether it
wants to received aid. If it decides to take State aid then Article 30(2)
merely provides that the State will not discriminate against it. When State,
whilst giving aid, asks the minority educational institute to comply with a
constitutional mandate, it can hardly be said that the State is discriminating
against that institute. The State is bound to ensure that all educational
institutes, whether majority or minority, comply with the constitutional
mandate.

37\. Another respect to be kept in mind is that in practical terms, throwing
open admission to all, does not affect rights under Article 30(1). If the
educational institution is for purposes of teaching the religion or language
of the concerned minority, then even though admission is thrown open to all
very few students of other communities will take admission in such an
educational institution. If the educational institution is giving general
secular education, then the minority character of that institution does not
get affected by having a majority of students from other communities. Even
though the majority of students may be from other communities the institution
will still be under the management of the minority. Further if the educational
institution is a school, then the management will, in spite of Article 29(2),
still be able to take a sizable number of students from their own community
into the school. Article 29(2) precludes reservations on grounds of religion,
race, caste or language. But it does not preclude giving of preference, if
everything else is equal. Admission into schools generally are by interview.
At this stage there is no common entrance test which determines merit.
Undoubtedly children of the minority communities, contemplated by Article
30(1), would be as bright or capable as children of other communities. Thus
whilst admitting at this stage preference can always be given to members of
their own community so long as some students of other communities are also
admitted and denial is not on basis of religion, race, caste, language or any
of them. Thus for admissions in schools, Article 29(2) will pose no difficulty
to minority institutions. However, Article 29(2) will require, if State aid is
taken, that admissions into college, either under graduate or post graduate
and admission into professional course, be not denied to any citizen on
grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. This would mean
that admissions must be on merit from the common entrance test prescribed by
the University or State. Here also if two students have equal merit,
preference can be given to a student of their own community. Also Article
29(2) does not preclude minority (or even other educational institutions)
admitting or denying admission on grounds other than religion, race, caste,
language or any of them. Thus e.g. preferential admission could be given to
those students who are willing to serve the community or work in a particular
region, for a particular period of time after passing out. Also in such cases
marks not exceeding 15% can be allotted for interviews. This will ensure that
a sufficient number of students of their own community are admitted. More
importantly there is no reason to believe that students of these minority
communities will not be able to compete on merit. A sizable number will be
available on merit also.

38\. Most importantly we are interpreting the Constitution. As the language of
Articles 29(2) and 30 is clear and unambiguous the Court has to give effect to
it, irrespective of the consequences. This is all the more necessary as the
same is in consonance with the intention of the framers. Court cannot give an
interpretation which creates a clash where none exits. Court cannot add words
which the framers purposely omitted to use/add. Courts cannot give an
interpretation, not supported by a plain reading, on considerations, such as
minority educational institutions not being able to admit their own students.
To be remembered that there is no compulsion to receive State aid. As was
mentioned during the Constituent Assembly Debates the management can refuse to
take aid. But if they choose to take State aid, then even a minority
educational institution must abide by the Constitutional mandate of Article
29(2) just as they have to comply with the Constitutional mandate of Article
28(2) and comply with general secular laws of the country.

39\. Thus looked at either from the historical point of view and/or the
intention of the framers and/or from the contextual viewpoint and/or from
principles of interpretation it is clear that Article 29(2) fully applies to
Article 30. If a minority educational institute chooses to take State aid, it
cannot then refuse to admit students on grounds of religion, race, case,
language or any of them.

40\. Now let us see whether the principles of "stare decisis" require us to
take a different view. A large number of authorities have been cited and one
has to consider these authorities.

41\. The first case, which was decided as far back as on 9th April, 1951, was
the case of The State of Madras v. Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan. It is
reported in (1951) SCR 525. In this case the State of Madras was maintaining
Engineering and Medical Colleges. In those colleges, for many years before the
commencement of the Constitution, the seats used to be filled up in a
proportion, set forth in what was called "the Communal G.O.". The allocation
of seats was as follows:

    
    
    "Non-Brahmin (Hindu)            6
    Backward Hindus                 2
    Brahmins                        2
    Harijans                        2
    Anglo-Indians and Indian
    Christians                      1
    Muslims                         1"
    

After the Constitution was framed a Writ Petition under Article 226 came to be
filed by Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan and one another in the High Court of
Madras. She complained that this Communal G. O. affected her fundamental
rights, inter alia, under Article 29(2). On behalf of the State it was argued
that there was no discrimination and no infringement of fundamental rights. It
was argued that it was the duty of the State to take care of and promote
educational and economic interest of the weaker section of the people. It was
argued that giving preferences and/or reservations did not violate Article
29(2). This argument was repelled and it was held as follows:

"It will be noticed that while Clause (1) protects the language, script or
culture of a section of the citizens, Clause (2) guarantees the fundamental
right of an individual citizen. The right to get admission into any
educational institution of the kind mentioned in Clause (2) is a right which
an individual citizen has as a citizen and not as a member of any community or
class of citizens. This right is not to be denied to the citizen on grounds
only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. If a citizen who seeks
admission into any such educational institution has not the requisite academic
qualifications and is denied admission on that ground, he certainly cannot be
heard to complain of an infraction of his fundamental right under this
article. But, on the other hand, if he has the academic qualifications but is
refused admission only on ground of religion, race, caste, language or any of
them, then there is a clear breach of his fundamental rights.

    
    
    xxx              xxx              xxx
    xxx              xxx              xxx
    

Take the case of the petitioner Srinivasan. It is not disputed that he secured
a much larger number of marks than the marks secured by many of the Non-
Brahmin candidates and yet the Non-Brahmin candidates who secured less number
of marks will be admitted into six out of every 14 seats but the petitioner
Srinivasan will not be admitted into any of them. What is the reason for this
denial of admission except that he is a Brahmin and not a Non-Brahmin. He may
have secured higher marks than the Anglo-Indian and Indian Christians or
Muslim candidates but nevertheless, he cannot get any of the seats reserved
for the last mentioned communities for no fault of his except that he is a
Brahmin and not a member of the aforesaid communities. Such denial of
admission cannot but be regarded as made on ground only of his caste.

It is argued that the petitioners are not denied admission only because they
are Brahmins but for a variety of reasons, e.g., (a) they are Brahmins, (b)
Brahmins have an allotment of only two seats out of 14 and

(c) the two seats have already been filled up by more meritorious Brahmin
candidates. This may be true so far as these two seats reserved for the
Brahmin are concerned but this line of argument can have no force when we come
to consider the seats reserved for candidates of other communities, for so far
as those seats are concerned, the petitioners are denied admission into any of
them not on any ground other than the sole ground of their being Brahmins and
not being members of the community for whom these reservations have been made.
The classification in the Communal G.O. proceeds on the basis of the religion,
race and caste. In our view, the classification made in the Communal G.O. is
opposed to the Constitution and constitutes a clear violation of the
fundamental rights guaranteed to the citizen under Article 29(2). In this view
of the matter, we do not find it necessary to consider the effect of Articles
14 or 15 on the specific articles discussed above."

Thus as far back as in 1951 it has been held that Article 29(2) does not
permit reservation in favour of any caste, community or class of people. An
argument based on the word "only" in Article 29(2), to the effect that
admitting students of their own community did not amount to refusing admission
on grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them was rejected.
Undoubtedly, this was a case pertaining to educational institutions maintained
by the State. But the interpretation of Article 29(2) would remain the same
even in respect of "educational institutions aided by the State". In all such
institutions there can be no reservations based on religion, race, caste,
language or any of them. The term "any educational Institution" in Article
29(2) would also include a minority educational institution under Article 30.
Thus the interpretation of Article 29(2) would remain the same even in respect
of a minority educational institution under Article 30(1).

42\. In Champakam Dorairajan's case the reservations were not just for
economically or socially backward communities. There were reservations for
Anglo Indians, Indian Christians, Muslims, Brahmins and Non-Brahmins. After
this Court struck down the reservation the framers of the Constitution amended
Article 15 by adding Article 15(4) which reads as follows: "15(4). Nothing in
this article or in Clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes."

Thus when the framers of the Constitution did not want Article 29(2) to apply
they have specially so provided. Significantly no such amendment was made in
Article 30(1) even though reservations in favour of minority communities was
also held to be violative of Article 29(2).

43\. In the case of the State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society and Ors.
reported in (1955) 1 SCC 568 an Anglo-Indian School, called Barnes High Court
at Deolali, received aid from the State of Bombay. The State of Bombay issued
a circular order on 6th January, 1954 which enjoined that no primary or
secondary school could admit to a class where English is used as the medium of
instruction, any pupil other than the pupil whose mother tongue was English.
This was challenged in a Writ Petition under Article 226 in the High Court of
Bombay. The Petition having been allowed, the State filed an Appeal to this
Court. This Court held as follows: "Assuming, however, that under the impugned
order a section of citizens, other than Anglo-Indian and citizens of non-
Asiatic descent, whose language is English, may also get admission, even then
citizens, whose language is not English, are certainly debarred by the order
from admission to a School where English is used as a medium of instruction in
all the classes. Article 29(2) ex facie puts no limitation or qualification on
the expression "citizen". Therefore, the construction sought to be put upon
Clause 5 does not apparently help the learned Attorney-General, for even on
that construction the order will contravene the provisions of Article 29(2).

The learned Attorney-General then falls back upon two contentions to avoid the
applicability of Article 29(2). In the first place he contends that Article
29(2) does not confer any fundamental right on all citizens generally but
guarantees the rights of citizens of minority groups by providing that they
must not be denied admission to educational institutions maintained by the
State or receiving aid out of the State funds on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them and he refers us to the marginal note to
the article. This is certainly a new contention put forward before us for the
first time. It does not appear to have been specifically taken in the
affidavits in opposition filed in the High Court and there is not indication
in the judgment under appeal that it was advanced in this form before the High
Court. Nor was this point specifically made a ground of appeal in the petition
for leave to appeal to this Court. Apart from this, the contention appears to
us to be devoid of merit. Article 29(1) gives protection to any section of the
citizens having a distinct language, script or culture by guaranteeing their
right to conserve the same. Article 30(1) secures to all minorities, whether
based on religion or language, the right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice. Now suppose the State maintains an
educational institution to help conserving the distinct language, script or
culture of a section of the citizens or makes grants in aid to an educational
institution established by a minority community based on religion or language
to conserve their distinct language, script or culture, who can claim the
protection of Article 29(2) in the matter of admission into any such
institution? Surely the citizens of the very section whose language, script or
culture is sought to be conserved by the institution or the citizens who
belong to the very minority group which has established and is administering
the institution, do not need any protection against themselves and therefore
Article 29(2) is not designed for the protection of this section or this
minority. Nor do we see any reason to limit Article 29(2) to citizens
belonging to a minority group other than the section or the minorities
referred to in Article 29(1) or Article 30(1), for the citizens, who do no
belong to any minority group, may quite conceivably need this protection just
as much as the citizens of such other minority groups. If it is urged that the
citizens of the majority group are amply protected by Article 15 and do not
require the protection of Article 29(2), then there are several obvious
answers to that argument. The language of Article 29(2) is wide and
unqualified and may well cover all citizens whether they belong to the
majority or minority group. Article 15 protects all citizens against the State
whereas the protection of Article 29(2) extends against the State or any body
who denies the right conferred by it. Further Article 15 protects all citizens
against discrimination generally but Article 29(2) is a protection against a
particular species of wrong namely denial of admission into educational
institutions of the specified kind. In the next place Article 15 (SIC) quite
general and wide in its terms and applies to all citizens, whether they belong
to the majority or minority groups, and gives protection to all the citizens
against discrimination by the State on certain specific grounds. Article 29(2)
confers a special right on citizens for admission into educational
institutions maintained or aided by the State. To limit this right only to
citizens belonging to minority groups will be to provide a double protection
for such citizens and to hold that the citizens of the majority group have no
special educational rights in the nature of a right to be admitted into an
educational institution for the maintenance of which they make contributions
by way of taxes. We see no cogent reason for such discrimination. The heading
under which articles 29 and 30 are grouped together -- namely "Cultural and
Educational Rights" -- is quite general and does not in terms contemplate such
differentiation. If the fact that the institution is maintained or aided out
of State funds is the basis of this guaranteed right then all citizens,
Irrespective of whether they belong to the majority or minority groups, are
alike entitled to the protection of this fundamental right. In view of all
these considerations the marginal note alone, on which the Attorney-General
relies, cannot be read as controlling the plain meaning of the language in
which Article 29(2) has been couched. Indeed in The State of Madras v.
Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan [(1951) SCR 525], this Court has already held as
follows: "It will be noticed that while Clause (1) protects the language,
script or culture or a section of the citizens, Clause (2) guarantees the
fundamental right of an individual citizen. The right to get admission into
any educational institution of the kind mentioned in Clause (2) is a right
which an individual citizen has as a citizen and not as a member of any
community or class of citizens."

In our judgment this part of the contention of the learned Attorney-General
cannot be sustained." (emphasis supplied) In this case it was also argued that
the word "only" in Article 29(2) had to be given some meaning and that the
circular order did not deny citizens admission only on ground of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them. It was submitted that the object of the
circular order was to secure advancement of Hindi which was ultimately to be
the National language. It was submitted that thus there was no denial "only"
on the ground of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. It was
submitted that the denial was for the purposes of promoting the advancement of
the national language and to facilitate imparting of education through the
medium of the pupils mother tongue. this argument was repelled in the
following terms: "Granting that the object of the impugned order before us was
what is claimed for it by the learned Attorney-General, the question still
remains as to how that object has been sought to be achieved. Obviously that
is sought to be done by denying to all pupils, whose mother tongue is not
English, admission into any School where the medium of instruction is English.
Whatever the object, the immediate ground and direct cause for the denial is
that the mother tongue of the pupil is not English. Adapting the language of
Lord Thankerton, it may be said that the laudable object of the impugned order
does not obviate the prohibition of Article 29(2) because the effect of the
order involved an infringement of this fundamental right, and that effect is
brought about by denying admission only on the ground of language. The same
principle is implicit in the decision of this Court in The State of Madras v.
Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan [(1951) SCR 525]. There also the object of the
impugned communal G.O. was to advance the interest of educationally backward
classes of citizens but, that object notwithstanding, this Court struck down
the order as unconstitutional because the modus operandi to achieve that
object was directly based only on one of the forbidden grounds specified in
the article. In our opinion the impugned order offends against the fundamental
right guaranteed to all citizens by Article 29(2)."

It may be mentioned, even though not relevant for the purposes of this
judgment, that in this case it has also been submitted that the rights under
Article 30(1) are only for the purposes of conserving language, script or
culture as set out in Article 29(1). This argument was also repelled by this
Court.

44\. Thus, as far back in 1955, a Constitution Bench of this Court has held
that Article 29(2) is applicable to Article 30. It has been held that even in
a minority educational institution all citizens of India are entitled to
admission. It has been held that a citizen cannot be denied admission in a
minority educational institution on ground "only" of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them. To be noted that one of the petitions was from the
Gujarati Hindu community and she was seeking admission into an Anglo-Indian
School. Her right to be admitted was upheld. It has been categorically held
that Article 29(2) applied to an Article 30 educational institute. The framers
of the Constitution did not and have not amended the Constitution to provide
otherwise.

45\. In Re The Kerala Education Bill, 1957 reported in (1959) SCR 995, the
President of India made a Reference under Article 143(1) of the Constitution
of India for obtaining opinion of this Court upon certain questions relating
to the constitutional validity of some of the provisions of the Kerala
Education Bill which had been passed by the Kerala Legislative Assembly, but
had been reserved by the Governor for consideration of the President of India.
The questions which were referred to this Court for consideration were as
follows:

"(1) Does Sub-clause (5) of Clause 3 of the Kerala Education Bill, read with
Clause 36 thereof, or any of the provisions of the said sub-clause, offend
Article 14 of the Constitution in any particulars or to any extent? (2) Do
Sub-clause (5) of Clause 3, Sub-clause (3) of Clause 8 and Clauses 9 to 13 of
Kerala Education Bill, or any provision thereof, offend Clause (1) of Article
30 of the Constitution in any particulars or to any extent. (3) Does Clause 15
of the Kerala Education Bill, or any provisions thereof, offend Article 14 of
the Constitution in any particulars or to any extent? (4) Does Clause 33 of
the Kerala Education Bill, or any provisions thereof, offend Article 226 of
the Constitution in any particulars or to any extent?"

46\. Only question No.2 is relevant for our purposes. Whilst answering
question No.2 this Court, inter alia, observed as follows: "Re. Question 2:
Articles 29 and 30 are set out in Part III of our Constitution which
guarantees our fundamental rights. They are grouped together under the sub-
head "Cultural and Educational Rights". The text and the marginal notes of
both the Articles show that their purpose is to confer those fundamental
rights on certain sections of the community which constitute minority
communities. Under Clause (1) Article 29 and section of the citizens residing
in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language,
script or culture of its own has the right to conserve the same. It is obvious
that a minority community can effectively conserve its language, script or
culture by and though educational institutions and, therefore, the right to
establish and maintain educational institutions of its choice is a necessary
concomitant to the right to conserve its distinctive language, script or
culture and that is what is conferred on all minorities by Article 30(1) which
has hereinbefore been quoted in full. This right, however, is subject to
Clause 2 of Article 29 which provides that no citizen shall be denied
admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them.

    
    
    xxx                xxx                xxx
    xxx                xxx                xxx
    

The second proviso imposes the condition that at least 40 per cent of the
annual admissions must be made available to the members of communities other
than the Anglo- Indian community. Likewise Article 29(2) provides, inter alia,
that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them. These are the only constitutional limitations to the
right of the Anglo-Indian educational institutions to receive aid. Learned
counsel appearing for two Anglo-Indian schools contends that the State of
Kerala is bound to implement the provisions of Article 337. Indeed it is
stated in the statement of case filed by the State of Kerala that all
Christian schools are aided by that State and, therefore, the Anglo-Indian
schools, being also Chiristian schools, have been so far getting from the
State of Kerala the grant that they are entitled to under Article 337. Their
grievance is that by introducing this Bill the State of Kerala is now seeking
to impose besides the constitutional limitations mentioned in the second
proviso to Article 337 and Article 29(2), further and more onerous conditions
on this grant to the Anglo-Indian educational institutions although their
constitutional right to such grant still subsist." (emphasis supplied)

47\. In this case it was argued on behalf of the State that as the minority
instate received State aid it was bound, by virtue of Article 29(2), to admit
students of all communities and thus did not retain its minority character.
That Article 29(2) applied to a minority educational institute was not denied.
The argument that, it lost its minority character because it admitted students
of other communities, was repelled in the following terms.

"By admitting a non-member into it the minority institution does not shed its
character and cease to be a minority institution. Indeed the object of
conservation of the distinct language, script and culture of a minority may be
better served by propagating the same amongst non- members of the particular
minority community. In our opinion, it is not possible to read this condition
into Article 30(1) of the Constitution." Thus even in this case it has been
accepted and held that Article 26(2) applies to minority educational
institutions established under Article 30. It has been held that merely
because students of other communities are admitted, the institute does not
lose its minority character. In this case it was also held that State can
prescribe reasonable regulations. In this case regulations which provided for
qualifications of teachers and which provided for State Public Service
Commission to select teachers in aide schools were upheld. Thus even in this
case it is accepted that Article 29(2) would govern Article 30(1).

48\. In Rev. Sidharjbahi Sabhai v. State of Bombay, the petitioners belonged
to the United Church of Northern India. They maintained educational
institutions primarily for the benefit of the Christian community. Admittedly
these institutions did not receive State aid. Therefore, the question of
Article 29(2) and its applicability to Article 30 did not arise. On the
contrary (as is set out on page 840 of the Report) it was an admitted position
that these institutions did not deny admissions to students belonging to other
communities. The Government of Bombay issued an order directing all private
training colleges to reserve 60% of the seats for trainee teachers of the
schools maintained by the Board. It was held that this Order violated rights
under Article 30. All observations made in this case are in this context. They
cannot be drawn out of context to hold that even where a minority institute
receives aid the Constitutional mandate of Article 29(2) would not apply. In
this case also it is held that the rights under Article 30(1) are subject to
reasonable restrictions and regulations. It was held that restrictions in the
interest of efficiency, discipline, health, sanitation, public order etc.
could be imposed.

49\. In Rev. Father W. Proost v. State of Bihar, the petitioners maintained
St. Xavier's College which was affiliate to the Patan University. With effect
form 1st March, 1962 Section 48-A was introduced. Under this Section a
University Service Commission was established for affiliated colleges. Sub-
clause (e) of Section 48-A provided that appointments, dismissals, removals,
termination of service or deduction in rank teachers of an affiliated college
should be made by the Governing body of the college on the recommendation of
the Commission. Further, Sub-clause (11) provided that all disciplinary
actions could be taken only in consultation with the Commission. The
petitioners challenged the virus of the provision and claimed that it affected
their rights under Article 30(1) of the Constitution. Whilst the Petition was
pending in this Court; Section 48-B was introduced in the Bihar State
Universities Act, which provided that appointments, dismissals, removals,
termination of service or reduction in rank of teachers or disciplinary
measures could only be taken with the approval of the Commission and the
Syndicate of the University. This was also challenged. Thus in this case the
interplay of Sections 29(2) and 30(1) did not come into questions at all. In
this case it was an admitted position that the college was open to non-
Catholics also. One of the arguments raised on behalf of the State was that
since the admissions were not reserved only for students of the Jesuits
community the college did not qualify for protection under Article 30(1). This
argument was negatived by holding that merely because members of other
communities were admitted to the institution did not mean the institution lost
its minority character. This case thus shows that even if members of other
community are admitted into the institution the institution would still remain
a minority institution which is under the management of the minority.

50\. In Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro v. State of Bihar, an educational institute was
started by a Christian with the help of funds received from London Missionary
Society. The question was whether the institute was not entitled to protection
of Article 30(1) merely because funds were obtained from United Kingdom and
the management was carried on by some persons who may not have been born in
India. This Court held that rights under Article 29 could only be claimed by
Indian citizens, but Article 30 guarantees the rights of minority. It was held
that the said Article does not refer to citizenship as the qualification for
members of the minority. This case therefore does not deal with the question
of the interplay between Articles 29(2) and 30(1).

51\. In the case of State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial reported in
(1971) 1 SCR 734, the Constitutional validity of Sections 48, 49, 53, 56, 58
and 63 of the Kerala University Act was challenged as violation the rights
under Section 30(1). In this case there is no discussion regarding the effect
of Article 29(2) on Article 30. In this case also it was held that rights
under Article 30(1) are subject to reasonable restrictions.

52\. The case of D.A.V. College v. Punjab reported in (1971) Supp. SCR 677
does not deal with Article 29(2) and its effect on Article 30. In this case
Punjabi was made the sole medium of instruction and examination under the
Punjab University Act. It was held that this violated the rights under Article
29(1) as well as Article 30(1) inasmuch as the right to have an educational
institution of a choice includes the right to have a choice of the medium of
instruction also.

53\. In the second case of D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab reported in
(1971) Supp. SCR 688 the Dayanand Anglo Vedic College Trust was formed to
perpetuate the memory of the founder of the Arya Samaj. It ran various
institutions in the country. The collages managed and administered by the
Trust were, before the Punjab Reorganisation Act, affiliated to the Punjab
University. After the reorganisation of the State of Punjab in 1969, the
Punjab Legislative passed the Guru Nank University (Amritsar) Act (21 of
1969). Colleges in the districts specified ceased to be affiliated to the
Punjab University and were to be associated with and admitted to the
privileges of the new university. Sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Act
provided that the university "shall make provision for study and research on
the life and teaching of Guru Nanka and their cultural and religious impact in
the context of Indian and World Civilisation; and Sub-section (3) enjoined the
University "to promote studies to provide for research in Punjabi language and
literature and to undertake measures for the development of Punjabi language,
literature and culture". By Clause 2(1)(a) of the Statutes framed under the
Act, the colleges were required to have a regularly constituted governing body
consisting of not more than 20 persons approved by the Senate including, among
others, two representatives of the University and the principal of the
College. Under Clause (1)(3) if these requirements were not complied with the
affiliation was liable to be withdrawn. By Clause 18 the staff initially
appointed were to be approved by the Vice Chancellor and subsequent changes
had to be reported to the University for the Vice- Chancellor's approval. And
by Clause 18 non- government colleges were to comply with the requirements
laid down in the ordinance governing service and conduct of teachers. It was
held that Clause 2(1)(a) interfered with the right of the religious minority
to administer their educational institutions, but that Clause 18 did not
suffer from the same vice. It was held that ordinances prescribing regulations
governing the conditions of service and conduct of teachers must be considered
to be one enacted in the larger interest of the institution to ensure their
efficiency and excellence. It was similarly held that Sub- sections (2) and
(3) of Section 4 do not offend any of the rights under Articles 29(1) and
30(1). It must be observed that, whilst dealing with the Articles 29 and 30,
this Court observed as follows: "It will be observed that Article 29(1) is
wider than Article 30(1), in that, while any Section of the citizens including
the minorities, can invoke the rights guaranteed under Article 29(1), the
rights guaranteed under Article 30(1) are only available to the minorities
based on religion or language. It is not necessary for Article 30(1) that the
minority should be both a religious minority as well as linguistic minority.
It is sufficient if it is one or the other or both. A reading of these two
Articles together would lead us to conclude that a religious or linguistic
minority has a right to establish and administer educational institutions of
its choice for effectively conserving its distinctive language, script or
culture, which right however is subject to the regulatory power of the State
for maintaining and facilitating the excellence of its standards. This right
is further subject to Clause (2) of Article 29 which provides that no citizen
shall be denied admission into any educational institution which is maintained
by the State or receives aid out of State funds, on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them." (emphasis supplied)

54\. Thus, even in 1971, this Court has held that Article 29(2) governs
Article 30(1). The law laid down in Champakam Dorairajan's case, in Bombay
Education Society's case and in Kerala Education Bill's case has been
reaffirmed. Till this date no contrary view has been taken. Not a single case
has held that rights under Article 30(1) would not be governed by Article
29(2).

55\. The authority on which strong reliance has been placed by the counsel of
the minority is St. Xaviers College's case (supra). St. Xaviers College was
affiliated to the Gujarat University. A resolution was passe by the Senate of
the University that all instruction, teaching and training in courses of
studies in respect of which the University was competent to hold examinations
shall be conducted by the university and shall be imported by teachers of the
University. Section 5 of the Act provided that no educational institution
situated within the University shall, save with the sanction of the State
Government, be associated in any way with or seek admission to any privilege
of any other University established by law. Section 33A(1)(a) of the Act
provided that every College other than a Government College or a College
maintained by the Government, shall be under the management of a governing
body which included among others, the Principal of the College and a
representative of the University nominated by the Vice-Chancellor. Section
33A(1)(b)(I) provided that in the case of recruitment of the Principal, a
selection committee is required to be constituted consisting of, among others,
a representatives of the University nominated by the Vice-Chancellor and (ii)
in the case of selection of a member of the teaching staff of the College a
selection committee consisting of the Principal and a representative of the
university nominated by the Vice-Chancellor. Sub-section (3) of the Section
stated that the provisions of Sub-section (1) of Section 33A shall be deemed
to be a condition of affiliation of every college referred to in that sub-
section. Section 39 provided that within the University area all post-graduate
instruction, teaching and training shall be conducted by the University or by
such affiliated College or institution and in such subjects as may be
prescribed by statutes. Section 40(1) enacted that the Court of the University
may determine that all instructions, teaching and training in courses of
studies in respect of which the University is competent to hold examinations
shall be conducted by the University and shall be imparted by the teachers of
the University. Sub-section (2) of Section 40 stated that the State Government
shall issue a notification declaring that the provisions of Section 41 shall
come into force on such date as may be specified in the notification. Section
41(1) of the Act stated that all colleges within the University area which are
admitted to the privilege of the university under Section 5(3) and all
colleges within the said area which may hereafter be affiliated to the
University shall be constituent colleges of the University. Sub-section (4)
stated that the relations of the constituent colleges and other institutions
within the University area shall be governed by statutes to be made in that
behalf. Section 51A(a)(b) enacted that no member of the teaching other
academic and non-teaching staff of an affiliated college shall be dismissed or
removed or reduced in rank except after an enquiry in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in Clause (a) and the penalty to be inflicted on him is
approved by the Vice-Chancellor or any other Officer of the University
authorised by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf. Similarly Clause (b) of Sub-
section (2) required that such termination should be approved by the Vice-
Chancellor or any officer of the University authorised by the Vice-Chancellor
in this behalf. Section 52A(1) enacted that any dispute between the governing
body and any member of the teaching and other staff shall, on a request of the
governing body or of the member concerned be referred to a tribunal of
arbitration consisting of one member nominated by the governing body of the
college, one member nominated by the member concerned and an umpire appointed
by the Vice-Chancellor. The Petitioner Society contended that they had a
fundamental right to establish and administer educational institutions of
their choice and that such a right included the right of affiliation. They
therefore challenged the constitutional validity of the above Sections. It is
in this context that various observations have been made. These observations
cannot be drawn out of context. In this case it was an admitted position, as
set out by Justice Khanna, that children of all classes and creeds were
admitted to the college provided they met the qualifying standards. Thus the
College never claimed the right to only admit students of its own community.
It acknowledged the fact that it had to admit students of all classes and
creeds. The majority Judgment, therefore, did not deal with the question or
interplay between Articles 29(2) and 30. Even though it did not deal with the
interplay of Articles 29(2) and 30, it was clear that reasoning of the
majority is based on the fact that the College did not deny admissions to the
students of other communities. This is clearly indicated by the test which had
been laid down by the majority. This test reads as follows:

"Such regulation must satisfy a dual test - the test of reasonableness, and
the test that it is regulative of the educational character of the institution
and is conducive to making the institution an effective vehicle of education
for the minority community or other persons who resort to it." (emphasis
supplied) Thus it is held by the majority that the institute is to be made an
effective vehicle of education not just for the minority community but also
for other persons who resort to do. This indicates that the majority made the
observations on the understanding that admissions were not restricted only to
students of minority community once State aid was received. This aspect is
clearly brought out in the Judgment of Justice Dwivedi who, whilst dealing
with the various provisions of the Constitution, held as follows:

"A glance at the context and scheme of Part III of the Constitution would show
that the Constitution makers did not intend to confer absolute rights on a
religious or linguistic minority to establish and administer educational
institutions. The associate Article 29(2) imposes one restriction on the right
in Article 30(1). No religious or linguistic minority establishing and
administering an educational institution which receives aid from the State
funds shall deny admission to any citizen to the institution on grounds only
of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. The right to admit a
student to an educational institution is admittedly comprised in the right to
administer it. This right is partly curtailed by Article 29(2).

The right of admission is further curtailed by Article 15(4) which provides an
exception to Article 29(2). Article 15(4) enables the State to make any
special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally
backward class of citizens or for the scheduled caste and scheduled tribes in
the matter of admission in the educational institutions maintained by the
State or receiving aid from the State.

Article 28(3) imposes a third restriction on the right in Article 30(1). It
provides that no person attending any educational institution recognised or
receiving aid by the State shall be required to take part in any religious
instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any
religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any premises
attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a minor, his
guardian has given his consent thereto. Obviously, Article 28(3) prohibits a
religious minority establishing and administering an educational institution
which receives aid or is recognised by the State from compelling any citizen
reading in the institution to receive religious instruction against his wishes
or if minor against the wishes of his guardian. It cannot be disputed that the
right of a religious minority to impart religious instruction in an
educational institution forms part of the right to administer the institution.
And yet Article 28(3) curtails that right to a certain extent.

To sum up Articles 29(2), 15(4) and 28(3) place certain express limitations on
the right in Article 30(1). There are also certain implied limitations on this
right. The right should be read subject to those implied limitations."
(emphasis supplied) Thus even in this authority the principle that Article
29(2) applies to Article 30(1) has been recognised and upheld. This case also
holds that reasonable restrictions can be placed on the rights under Article
30(1) subject to the test set out hereinabove.

56\. In the case of Gandhi Faizeam College v. Agra University reported in
(1975) 3 SCR 810 the minority college was affiliated to the University of
Agra. It applies for permission to start teaching in certain courses of study.
The University, as a condition of permitting the additional subjects, insisted
that the Managing Committee must be re-constituted in line with Statute 14-A
which provided that the principal of the College and senior-most staff member
should be part of the Managing Committee. The Petitioners filed a Writ
Petition in the High Court challenging the imposition of such a condition on
the ground that it was violative of their rights under Article 30(1). The High
Court dismissed the Writ Petition. Therefore the Petitioners came to this
Court. The majority of Judges upheld the order of the High Court, inter alia,
on the ground that the right under Article 30(1) is not the absolute right and
that it is a right which can be restricted. After considering the various
authorities (including some of those set out hereinabove) it was held that
reasonable regulations are desirable, necessary and constitutional, provided
they shape but not cut out of shape the individual personality of the
minority. It was held as follows:

"In all these cases administrative autonomy is imperilled transgressing purely
regulatory limits. In our case autonomy is virtually left intact and
refurbishing, not restructuring, is prescribed. The core of the right is not
gouged out at all and the regulation is at once reasonable and calculated to
promote excellence of the institution - a text book instance of constitutional
conditions."

Thus a condition that the Managing Committee be reconstituted is upheld. To be
noted that the directly affects the right of administration. Now compulsory
the principal and one of the staff members would be part of the Managing
Committee. Yet it has been held that this is not violative of rights under
Article 30(1).

57\. In the case of St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, one of the
questions was the applicability of Article 29(2) to Article 30(1). Even in
this case it has been accepted that Article 29(2) applies to Section 30(1).
However, the majority of the Judges, after noting that Article 29(2) applies
to Article 30(1), sought to compromise and/or strike a balance between
Articles 29(2) and 30(1). They therefore prescribed a ratio of 50% to be
admitted on merits and 50% to be admitted by the College from their own
community. All Counsel, whether appearing for the minorities or for the
States/local authorities attacked this judgment and submitted that it is not
correct. Of course Counsel for the minorities were claiming a right to admit
students of their own community even to the extent of 100%. On the other hand
the submission was that once State aid is taken Article 29(2) applied and not
even a single student could be admitted on basis of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them. Thus all counsel attacked the judgment as being not
correct. In matters of interpretation, there can be no compromise. As stated
above if the language and meaning are clear then Courts must give effect to it
irrespective of the consequence. With the greatest of respect to the learned
Judges concerned, once it was held that Article 29(2) applied to Article 30,
there was no question of trying to balance rights or to seek a compromise.

58\. Justice Kasliwal dissented from the majority view. It must be noted that
in St. Stephen's case, in his minority judgment, he has held that Article
29(2) governs Article 30(1) and that if the minority educational institute
chooses to take aid it must comply with the constitutional mandate of Article
29(2). The Judgment in St. Stephens case is of recent origin. It therefore
cannot form the basis for applying the principles of "State Decisis".

59\. Thus, from any point of view i.e. historical or contextual or on
principles of pure interpretation or on principles of "stare decisis" the only
interpretation possible is that the rights under Article 30(1) are conferred
on minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice at their own cost. The right is a special right which is given by way
of protection so that the majority, which is politically powerful, does not
prevent the minorities from establishing their educational institutions. This
right was not created because the minorities were economically and socially
backward or that their children would not be able to compete on merit with
children of other communities. This right was not conferred in order to create
a special category of the citizens. What has been granted to them is a right
which was equal to the rights enjoyed by the majority community, namely, to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice at their own
cost. As the institution was to be established and maintained at their own
expense no right to receive aid has been conferred on the minority institute.
All that Article 30(2) provides is that the State while granting aid would not
discriminate merely on the ground that an educational institute was under the
management of a minority. Article 30(2) has been so worded as the framers were
aware that once State aid was taken some aspects of the right of
administration would have to be compromised and given up. The minority
educational institute have a choice. They need not take State aid. But if they
choose to take State aid then they have to comply with constitutional mandates
which are based on principles which are as important as if not more important
than the rights given to the minorities. Our Constitution mandates that the
State cannot discriminate on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language
or any of them. Our Constitution mandates that all citizens are equal and that
no citizen can be denied admission into educational institution maintained by
the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them. Thus if State aid is taken the minority
educational institution must then not refuse admission to students of other
communities on any of those grounds. In other words, they cannot then insist
that they would admit students only of their community. Of course, as stated
above, preferences could always be given to students of their own community.
But preference necessarily implies that all other things are equal, i.e. that
on merit the student of their community is equal to the merit of the student
of other community. As stated above, in para 37, in schools the minority
community would have a larger amount of leeway and so long as the school
admits a sufficient number of outsiders Article 29(2) would not be violated if
the refusal is not made on the basis of the religion, race, caste, language or
any of them. Of course, at the under-graduate and post-graduate stages merit
would have to be the criteria. At these stages there are common entrance
examinations by which inter se merit can be assessed. But even here, the
minority educational institute can admit students of its own community on
grounds like those set out in para 37 above. They could give some preference
to students coming from their own schools. There could be interviews wherein
not more than 15% marks can be allotted. Students of their community will be
able to compete on merit also. All these would ensure that a sufficient number
of students of their own community receive admissions. But the minority
institute, once it receives State aid, cannot refuse to abide by the
constitutional mandate of Article 29(2). It would be paradoxical to unsettle
settled law at such a late stage. It would be paradoxical to hold that the
rights under Article 30(1) are subject to municipal and other laws, but that
they are not subject to the constitutional mandate under Article 29(2). It
would be paradoxical to held that Article 30(1) is subject to Article 28(3)
but not to Article 29(2). It must be remembered that when Article 29(2) was
introduced it was part of the same Article (viz. Article 23) which also
included what is now Article 30(1). Not only the Constituent Assembly Debates
but also the fact that they were part of the same Article shows that Article
29(2) was intended by the framers of the Constitution to apply even to
institutions established under Article 30(1). Thus Article 29(2) governs
educational institutions established under Article 30(1). The language is
clear and unambiguous. It is clear that Article 30(1) has full play so long as
the educational institution is established and maintained and administered by
the minority at their own costs. Article 30(2) purposely and significantly
does not make taking or granting of aid compulsory. The minority educational
institution need not take aid. However, it is chooses to take aid then it can
hardly claim that it would not abide by the Constitutional mandate of Article
29(2). Once the language is clear and unambiguous full effect must be given to
Article 29(2) irrespective of the consequences. This can be the only
interpretation. The only interplay between Articles 29(2) and 30(1) is that
once State aid is taken, then students of all communities must be admitted. In
others words, no citizen can be refused admission on grounds of religion,
race, caste or creed or any of them. Reserving seats for students of one's own
community would in effect be refusing admission on grounds of religion, race,
caste, or creed. As there is no conflict the question of balancing rights
under Article 30(1) and Article 29(2) of the Constitution does not arise. As
stated by the US Supreme Court in the case of San Antonio Independent School
District v. Demetrio P. Rudriguez (411 US 1), it is not the province of this
Court to create substantive Constitutional rights in the name of guaranteeing
equal protection.

60\. In view of above discussion we answer the questions as follows: Q.1. What
is the meaning and content of the expression "minorities" in Article 30 of the
Constitution of India?

A. Linguistic and religious minorities are covered by the expression
"minority" under Article 30 of the Constitution. Since reorganization of the
States in India has been on linguistic lines, therefore, for the purpose of
determining the minority, the unit will be the State and not the whole of
India. Thus, religious and linguistic minorities, who have been put at par in
Article 30, have to be considered state wise. Q.2. What is meant by the
expression "religion" in Article 30(1)? Can the followers of a sect or
denomination of a particular religion claim protection under Article 30(1) on
the basis that they constitute a minority in the State, even though the
followers of that religion are in majority in that State?

A. This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by
a regular Bench.

Q.3(a) What are the indicia for treating an educational institution as a
minority educational institution? Would an institution be regarded as a
minority educational institution because it was established by a person(s)
belonging to a religious or linguistic minority or its being administered by a
person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic minority? A. This question
need not be answered by this Bench, it will be dealt with by a regular Bench.

Q.3(b) To what extent can professional education be treated as a matter coming
under minorities rights under Article 30?

A. Article 30(1) gives religious and linguistic minorities the right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The use of
the words "of their choice", indicates that professional educational
institutions would be covered by Article 30.

Q.4. Whether the admission of students to minority educational institution,
whether aided or unaided, can be regulated by the State Government or by the
University to which the institution is affiliated? A. Admission of students to
unaided minority educational institutions, viz., Schools where scope for merit
based selection is practically nil, cannot be regulated by the State or the
University (except for providing the qualifications and minimum conditions of
eligibility in the interest of academic standards).

Right to admit students being an essential facet of right to administer
educational institutions of their choice, as contemplated under Article 30 of
the Constitution, the State Government or the University may not be entitled
to interfere with that right in respect of unaided minority institutions
provided however that the admission to the unaided educational institutions is
on transparent basis and the merit is the criteria. The right to administer,
not being an absolute one, there could be regulator measures for ensuring
educational standards and maintain exceptance thereof and it is more so, in
the matter of admission to undergraduate Colleges and professional
institutions.

The moment aid is received or taken by a minority educational institution it
would be governed by Article 29(2) and would then not be able to refuse
admission on grounds of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. In
other words it cannot then give preference to students of its own community.
Observance of inter se merit amongst the applicants must be ensured. In the
case of aided professional institutions, it can also be stipulated that
passing of common entrance test held by the State agency is necessary to seek
admission.

Q.5(a) Whether the minority's rights to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice will include the procedure and method of
admission and selection of students?

A. A minority institution may have its own procedure and method of admission
as well as selection of students, but such procedure must be fair and
transparent and selection of students in professional and higher educational
colleges should be on the basis of merit. The procedure adopted or selection
made should not tantamount to mal-administration. Even an unaided minority
institution, ought not to ignore merit of the students for admission, while
exercising its right to admit students to the colleges, aforesaid, as in that
event. The institution will fail to achieve excellence.

Q.5(b) Whether the minority institutions' right of admission of students and
to lay down procedure and method of admission, if any, would be affected in
any way by the receipt of State aid?

A. Further to what is stated in answer to question No. 4, it must be stated
that whilst giving aid to professional institutions, it would be permissible
for the authority giving aid to prescribe by-rules or regulations, the
conditions on the basis of which admission will be granted to different aided
colleges by virtue of merit, coupled with the reservation policy of the state.
The merit may be determined either through a common entrance test conducted by
the University or the Government followed by counselling, or on the basis of
an entrance test conducted by individual institutions - the method to be
followed is for the university or the government to decide. The authority may
also devise other means to ensure that admission is granted to an aided
professional institution on the basis of merit. In the case of such
institutions, it will be permissible for the government or the university to
provide that consideration should be shown to the weaker sections of the
society. Q.5(c) Whether the statutory Provisions which regulate the facets of
administration like control over educational agencies, control over governing
bodies, conditions of affiliation including recognition/withdrawal thereof,
and appointment of state employees, teachers and Principals including their
service conditions and regulation of fees, etc. would interfere with the right
of administration of minorities?

A. So far as the statutory provisions regulating the facets administration is
concerned, in case of an unaided minority educational institution, the
regulatory measure of control should be minimal and the conditions of
recognition as well as conditions of affiliation to an University or Board
have to be complied with, but in the matter of day-to-day Management, like
appointment of staff, teaching and non-teaching and administrative control
over them, the Management should have the freedom and there should not be any
external controlling agency. However, a rational procedure for selection of
teaching staff and for taking disciplinary action has to be evolved by the
Management itself. For redressing the grievances of such employees who are
subjected to punishment or termination from service, a mechanism will have to
be evolved and in our opinion, appropriate tribunals could be constituted, and
till then, such tribunal could be presided over by a Judicial officer of the
rank of District Judge. The state or other controlling authorities, however,
can always prescribe the minimum qualifications, salaries, experience and
other conditions bearing on the merit of an individual for being appointed as
a teacher of an educational institution.

Regulations can be framed governing service conditions for teaching and other
staff for whom aid is provided by the State without interfering with overall
administrative control of Management over the staff, Government/University
representative can be associated with the selection committee and the
guidelines for selection can be laid down. In regard to un-aided minority
educational institutions such regulations, which will ensure a check over
unfair practices and general welfare, of teachers could be framed.

There could be appropriate mechanism to ensure that no capitation fee is
charged and profiteering is not restored to.

The extent of regulations will not be the same for aided and un-aided
institutions.

Q.6(a) Where can minority institution be operationally located? Where a
religious or linguistic minority in State 'A' establishes an educational
institution in the said State, can such educational institution grant
preferential admission/reservations and other benefits to members of the
religious/linguistic group from other States where they are non-minorities? A.
This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by a
regular Bench.

Q.6(b) Whether it would be correct to say that only the members of that
minority residing in State 'A' will be treated as the members of the minority
vis-a-vis such institution?

A. This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by
a regular Bench.

Q.7. Whether the member of a linguistic non-minority in one State can
establish a trust/society in another State and claim minority status in that
State?

A. This question need not be answered by this Bench; it will be dealt with by
a regular Bench.

Q.8 Whether the ratio laid down by this Court in the St. Stephen's case (St.
Stephen's College v. University of Delhi is correct? If no, what order?

A. The ratio laid down in St. Stephen's College case is not correct. Once
State aid is taken and Article 29(2) comes into play, then no question arises
of trying to balance Article 29(2) and 31. Article 29(2) must be given its
full effect.

Q.9 Whether the decisions of this Court in Unni Krishnan J.P. v. State of A.P.
(except where it holds that primary education is a fundamental right) and the
scheme framed thereunder require reconsideration/modification and if yes,
what?

A. The scheme framed by this Court in Unni Krishnan's case and the direction
to impose the same, except where it holds that primary education is a
fundamental right, is unconstitutional. However, the principle that there
should not be capitation fee or profiteering is correct. Reasonable surplus to
meet cost of expansion and augmentation of facilities does not, however,
amount to profiteering.

Q.10 Whether the non-minorities have the right to establish and administer
educational institution under Articles 21 and 29(1) read with Article 14 and
15(1), in the same manner and to the same extent as minority institutions? and
Q.11 What is the meaning of the expressions "Education" and "Educational
Institutions" in various provisions of the Constitution? Is the right to
establish and administer educational institutions guaranteed under the
Constitution?

A. The expression "education" in the Articles of the Constitution means and
includes education at all levels from the primary school level up to the post-
graduate level. It includes professional education. The expression
"educational institutions" means institutions that impart education, where
"education" is as understood hereinabove.

The right to establish and administer educational institutions is guaranteed
under the Constitution to all citizens under Article 19(1)(g) and 26, and to
minorities specifically under Article 30. All citizens have a right to
establish and administer educational institutions under Articles 19(1)(g) and
26, but this right will be subject to the provisions of Articles 19(6) and
26(a). However, minority institutions will have a right to admit students
belonging to the minority group, in the manner as discussed in this judgment.

Hon'ble Judge :

Syed Shah Mohammed Quddir on 25th November 2002 Gave reasons for concurring
opinion in the judgment.

