

Bombay High Court

Champsey Bhara And Company vs The Jivraj Balloo Spinning And C. ... on 6
March, 1923

Equivalent citations: (1923) 25 BOMLR 588

Author: Dunedin

Bench: Atkinson, Dunedin, Wrenbury

JUDGMENT Dunedin, J.

1\. In these consolidated appeals it will be convenient to consider the first
case by itself. The appellants as sellers entered into two contracts with the
respondents as buyers of certain bales of cotton. The contracts were made
subject to the rules and regulations of the Bombay Cotton Trade Association,
Limited. Rule 12 of the said Association provides:

All questions or disputes as to quality between buyer and seller shall be
referred to the arbitration of two disinterested persona, one to be chosen by
each disputant, such arbitrators having the power to call in a third
arbitrator. The award made by such arbitrators or any two of them shall be
final and binding subject only to the right of appeal to the Appeal Committee
All arbitrations held under this Rule must be held in accordance with Rule 5,
and only shareholders and/or Directors shall be eligible to act on
arbitrations held in the rooms of the Association. Associate members, however,
shall be eligible to act as arbitrators when the arbitration is held in the
seller's jetha and/or godown as provided under Rule 5.

2\. Rule 13 provides:

All questions in dispute (other than that of quality) arising out of, or in
relation to, contracts made subject to the Rules and Regulations of The Bombay
Cotton Trade Association, Limited, provided one of the parties to the contract
is a member or associate member of the Association, shall be referred to the
arbitration of two disinterested persons being shareholders or directors of
the Association, one to be chosen by each disputant; such arbitrators having
the power to call in a third arbitrator who must also be a shareholder or
director of the Association.

The award made by such arbitrators or any two of them shall be final and
binding on both parties, subject only to the right of appeal to the Board
within 15 days of the date of the arbitrators' award on payment of Rs. 100.

3\. The cotton was delivered but objected to by the respondents as being not
up to contract. Upon this an arbitration was entered into between the parties,
and the arbitrators under Rule 12 made an award as to quality. Thereupon, the
respondents rejected the cotton. The appellants retorted by claiming damages.
This dispute was referred to arbitrators under Rule 13. They issued their
award as follows:

To all to whom these presents shall come, we, Purshotamdas Thakoredas of Hindu
Inhabitant, and Vincent Alpe Grantham, also of Bombay, European Inhabitant,
send greeting. Whereas by a contract dated 17th day of August, 1918, Messrs.
Champsey Bhara and Company bad agreed to sell to the Jivraj Balloo Spinning
and Weaving Company, Limited, 100 bales of Mundra M.G. Fully Good Staple
cotton on the terms and conditions mentioned in the contract. And whereas by
another contract dated 4th day of September, 1918, the said Messrs Champsey
Bhara and Company had also agreed to sell to the said Jivraj Balloo Spinning
and Weaving Company, Limited, 100 bales of New M.G. Mundra Cotton Fully Good
Staple on the terms and conditions therein contained. And whereas both the
said contracts were made subject to the rules and regulations of the Bombay
Cotton Trade Association, Limited. And whereas the goods tendered under the
said contracts by the said Messrs, Champsey Bhara and Company were rejected by
the Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company, Limited, on the grounds
contained in their letters dated 25th November, 1918, and 11th November, 1918,
respectively. And whereas the said Messrs. Champsey Bhara and Company claimed
from the said Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company, Limited, the sum of
Rs. 25,003 (rupees twenty-five thousand) in respect of the aforesaid
contracts. And whereas the said Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company,
Limited, denied liability in respect of the said sum or any part thereof. And
whereas the said disputes were referred to the arbitration of us, Purshotamdas
Thakoredas and Vincent Alpe Grantham, who were appointed Arbitrators by the
Deputy Chairman of the Bombay Cotton Trade Association, Limited. And whereas
on the 12th day of December the time for making our Award was extended by the
Deputy Chairman to the 27th day of December, 1918. Now know ye that we, the
said Purshotamdas Thakoredas and Vincent Alpe Grantham, having taken upon
ourself the burden of the said reference, and having done all acts necessary
to enable us to make a valid Award, hereby make our Award as follows, that is
to say:-We award and direct that the said Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving
Company, Limited, do pay to the said Messrs. Champsey Bhara and Company the
sum of 25,000 (rupees twenty-five thousand), and we do further award and
direct) that the said Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company, Limited, do
pay the coats of this our Award, which we assess at the sum of Rs. 55 (rupees
fifty-five).

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our respective hands this 23rd day of
December, 1918.

    
    
     Signed and Published this 23rd                   (Signed) 
    day of December, 1918, by us, Pur-               PURSHOTAMDAS THAKOREDAS.
    shotamdas Thakoredas and Vincent                 V.A. GRANTHAM.
    Alpe Granthatm in the presence of               
          (Signed) J.A. GRANT.
     
    
    

4\. An appeal was made to the Appeal Committee, who confirmed the award. The
respondents then presented a petition to the Court asking that the award
should be set aside. They alleged two grounds (1) that there was no question
referable to the arbitrators under Rule 13(2) that there was an error of law
on the face of the award, The case depended before Pratt J., who dismissed the
petition. Appeal was taken to the Appellate Division of the High Court, and
they reversed the judgment holding that there was an error in law on the face
of the award. The way that the learned Judges arrived at that conclusion was
this : They said that the recital that the respondents had rejected the cotton
on the grounds mentioned in the letters of November, 11 and 25, 1918,
respectively, allowed them to look at the letters. The letter of November 11
is as follows:

To Messrs, Champsey Bhara and Company.

Dear Sirs, Re : D/Order No. 27 dated 6.11.18 for 100 bales N. M.G. Mundra.

Please note that at the survey held this day on the above lot tendered by you
against contract No. 56, dated 4.19.8 as the Arbitrators have in their award
allowed Rs. 10 off, we hereby reject the said lot and refuse to take delivery
thereof.

The Jivraj Balloo Spinning And Weaving Company, Ltd.

5\. The letter of November 25, is in identical terms referring to the other
contract, The learned Judges then held that if Clause 52 of the Regulations is
looked at-it being the clause which deals with what is to happen when
arbitrators, as to quality, make certain findingsit becomes apparent that the
arbitrators here could only have arrived at their judgment if they entirely
misinterpreted Article 52,, They based their opinion, upon the case of
Landauer v. Asser [1905] 2 K.B. 184.

6\. The law on the subject has never been more clearly stated than by Williams
J. in the case of Hodgkinson v. Fernie: [1857] 3 C.B.N.S. 189.

The law has for many years been settled, and remains so at this day, that,
where a clause or matters in difference are referred to an arbitrator, whether
a lawyer or a layman, he is constituted the sole and final judge of all
questions both of law and of fact.... The only exceptions to that rule, are,
cases where the award is the result of corruption or fraud, and one other,
which though it is to be regretted, is now, 1 think, firmly established, viz.,
where the question of law necessarily aries on the face of the award, or upon
some paper accompanying and forming part of the award. Though the propriety of
this latter may very well be doubted, I think it may be considered as
established.

7\. This view has been adhered to in many subsequent cases, and in particular
in the House of Lords in British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Co.,
Limited v. Underground Electric Railways Co. of London, Limited [1912] A.C.
673.

8\. The question to be decided is : Does the error in law appear on the face
of the award? In the British Westinghouse case it clearly did. The arbitrator
had stated a special case and got an opinion of the Divisional Court; in
making his award he stated that opinion and founded his award upon it. The
opinion as given was held to be erroneous, and so there was an error in law on
the face of the award. In Landauer v. Asser the state of affairs was
different. The question was as to liability and interest on a policy of
insurance effected by sellers for and on account of buyers, and the arbitrator
framed his award thus:

I decide that as the parties to the contract dated November 3, 1903, were by
the terms thereof principals thereto, their interest and liability in
insurance is defined to be the value of the invoice plus 5 per rent., and that
the buyers are therefore entitled to and only to the said amount, the balance
one way or the other being due from or to the sellers.

9\. The Court of Appeal held that this entitled them to look at the contract
and to come to the conclusion that the decision was erroneous in law. The case
of Landauer v. Asser is not binding on their Lordships, and it was contended
that it was wrongly decided, but in their Lordships' opinion it is not
necessary to consider that point, for the present case differs from Landauer's
case in an essential particular. In that case the legal proposition was stated
in terms on which the award proceeded. In the present case, no legal
proposition at all is stated as a ground of award. The reference to the
letters is only in the narrative, and even when the letters are looked at they
only contain the view of one party. To make this case equiparate with that of
Landauer v. Asser the award would have to run somewhat thus:-"In respect of
the ground of rejection contained in the letters of November 11 and 25, and in
respect of Clause 52 of the Articles, I decide that, etc."

10\. Now the regret expressed by Williams J. in Hodgkinson v. Fernie has been
repeated by more than one learned Judge, and it is certainly not to be desired
that the exception should be in any way extended. An error in law on the face
of the award means, in their Lordships' view, that you can find in the award
or a document actually incorporated thereto, as for instance, a note appended
by the arbitrator stating the reasons for his judgment, some legal proposition
which is the basis of the award and which you can then say is erroneous. It
does not mean that if in a narrative a reference is made to a contention of
one party that opens the door to seeing first what that contention is, and
then going to the contract on which the parties' rights depend to see if that
contention is sound. Here it is impossible to say, from what is shown on the
face of the award, what mistake the arbitrators made. The only way that the
learned Judges have arrived at finding what the mistake was is by saying :
Inasmuch as the arbitrators awarded so-and-so, and inasmuch as the letter
shows that the buyer rejected the cotton, the arbitrators can only have
arrived at that result by totally misinterpreting Clause 52." But they were
entitled to give their own interpretation to Clause 52 or any other article,
and the award will stand unless, on the face of it, they have tied themselves
down to some special legal proposition which then, when examined, appears to
be unsound. Upon this point, therefore, their Lordships think that the
judgment of Pratt J. was right and the conclusion of the learned Judges of the
Court of Appeal erroneous.

11\. The counsel for the respondents then argued the other point, which the
learned Judges of the Court of Appeal found it unnecessary to decide, and
which the trial Judge decided against them. He said that upon a proper
construction of the contract the moment his client rejected the cotton in
virtue of the decision by the arbitrators as to quality, he was entitled to do
so, and the contract was repudiated or came to an end; that then the
arbitration clause could no longer be appealed to and he said that inasmuch as
this was a plea to jurisdiction the Court ought to decide it.

12\. Their Lordships think that this argument is based upon a confusion of
thought. The question of whether an arbitrator acts within his jurisdiction
is, of course, for the Court to decide, but whether the arbitrator acts within
his jurisdiction or not depends solely upon the clause of reference. It is,
therefore, for the Court to decide in this case whether the dispute which 'has
arisen is a dispute covered by Clause IS of the Articles. It clearly is so,
because it is undoubtedly a dispute arising out of or in relation to a
contract made subject to the rules and regulations of the Cotton Trade
Association. Now that clause refers to the arbitrator the whole question
whether it depends on law or on fact, with the exception only of dispute as to
quality. It is, therefore, for the arbitrator and not for the Court to decide
what is the effect of the rejection based on an award as to quality. In truth
this point is decided in terms by the recent case of Sanderson v. Armour
[1922] S.C.H.L. 117. It was a Scotch case, but in no way depended upon any
peculiarity of the law of

13\. The decision of the first appeal in this sense disposes of the second
appeal without further argument, as it is obvious that in that case even the
reference in the narrative to the grounds of defence in the letters is absent,
and there is nothing but the bare statement that a certain sum was awarded. It
follows that in the first appeal the appeal must be allowed and the judgment
of the trial Judge restored; the appellants must have their costs here and in
the Courts below. The second appeal must be dismissed and the respondents will
have their costs.

14\. Their Lordships will humbly advise His Majesty accordingly.

