

Delhi High Court

Alka Gupta vs Narender Kumar Gupta on 7 September, 2009

Author: V. K. Jain

    
    
    *        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
    +        R.F.A. (OS) 60/2009 & CM 9942/2009
    
                                               Reserved on: 1st September, 2009
    
                                           Pronounced on: 7th September, 2009
    
    #        ALKA GUPTA                                               ..... Petitioner
    !                                    Through: Ms. Sunita Harish, Advocate
    
                               Versus
    
    $        NARENDER KUMAR GUPTA               ..... Respondent
    ^                    Through: Mr. Rajeev Awasthi, Advocate
    
    CORAM:
    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K. JAIN
    
             1. Whether Reporters of Local newspapers may be allowed
                to see the Judgment? No
    
             2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
    
             3. Whether the Judgment should be reported in the
                Digest? Yes
    
    
    V.K.Jain, J.
    

This is an appeal against the judgment and decree dated March 13, 2009 whereby
CS (OS) No. 302 of 2007, filed by the appellant, has been dismissed. The brief
facts, as stated in the pleadings are as under:

2\. Vide partnership deed dated April 05, 2000, the appellant / plaintiff and
the defendant / respondent entered into a partnership RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 1
of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta for running an educational institute
under the name and style of M/s. Takshila Institute. As per the terms and
conditions of partnership, the place of business of firm was to be F-19, LAC,
Bhera Enclave, Paschim Vihar, Delhi - 110 087 and / or other place or places
as mutually decided by the parties. The fee etc. used to be collected by
defendant / respondent, who was also maintaining books of accounts and
managing the affairs of the firm. The defendant / respondent had been
withdrawing money from time to time, from the accounts of the firm whereas no
money, at all, was received by the plaintiff / appellant, as her share of the
profit. A Civil Suit for permanent injunction was filed by the defendant /
respondent against the plaintiff/appellant, her husband Shri Navindu Gupta and
her brother in law Shri Rajan Gupta, which was later on withdrawn on
16.10.2004. As a result of institution of the suit, the partnership being „At
Will‟, stood dissolved from the date of institution of the suit and the
defendant did not have any right to use the name, style and goodwill of
„Takshila Institute‟. A legal notice dated 8.3.05 was sent by the plaintiff /
appellant to the defendant / respondent, requiring him to stop using the name
„Takshila Institute‟ or its similar or phonetic variation. He was also called
upon to render full and true account of the income and expenditure of the
partnership firm. It has been further stated RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 2 of 20 Alka
Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta that during the subsisting of the partnership,
the defendant / respondent had opened another institute under the name and
style of „M/s. Taxila Institute at C-9/5, Sector-8, Rohini, Delhi using the
same photographs of students, logo, pictures etc. According to the plaintiff /
appellant, the defendant / respondent is also liable to account for and pay
the share of the plaintiff / appellant in the profits earned from „M/s. Taxila
Institute‟. It is further stated in the plaint that the defendant / respondent
was also using the goodwill of the partnership business to run other
institutes in the name and style of „Takshila Institute‟ at Janakpuri, Ashok
Vihar and Kalu Sarai, all at Delhi, and also at Dehradoon, Uttranchal,
Uttranchal, and Palampur, in Himachal Pradesh. The plaintiff sought a
preliminary decree for rendition of accounts, directing the defendants to
render complete accounts of all money received and expenditure incurred by him
in connection with the business carried out under the partnership agreement
dated 5.4.2000 and also all the monies earned by him by using the goodwill of
„Takshila Institute‟ at all places including the „Taxila Institute‟ at Rohini.
A final decree with costs along with a decree of Rs. 25.28 lacs or a higher
amount as per details stated to have been given in Annexure A was also sought.

RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 3 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta

3\. The defendant / respondent filed Written Statement taking preliminary
objection that the suit was barred by the principles of res judicata as
similar dispute had already been adjudicated between the parties, vide Suit
No. 16/06 titled as „Smt. Alka Gupta Versus Shri Narender Kumar Gupta‟,
decided by the court of Shri Paramjit Singh, Additional District Judge on
25.11.2006. It has been further alleged that during subsisting of the
partnership, the plaintiff and Smt. Deepa Gupta, wife of the defendant,
jointly acquired immovable properties including second floor of property No.
8, Block C-9 in Sector-8, Rohini, Delhi. Since disputes arose between the
parties, it was finally decided that total value of the partnership firm will
be made and 50 per cent share of the plaintiff would be calculated and paid to
her, and she would relinquish all her rights and claim in the institute, which
will then become an absolute property of the defendant. The total value was
assessed at Rs. 46.00 lacs and it was decided that the plaintiff will get Rs.
23.00 lacs from the defendant and transfer all her claims in the partnership
to him. A Biyana Agreement dated 29.6.04 was executed between the parties. The
payment of Rs. 23.00 lacs, agreed to be made to the plaintiff under the Biyana
Agreement, included Rs. 21.5 lacs against her 50 per cent share in the
institute and also the transfer of her undivided half share in the second
RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 4 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta floor of
property No. 8, in Block C-9 of Rohini, Delhi. The partnership stood dissolved
on execution of agreement dated 29.6.04. Since, instead of fulfilling the
terms of the agreement dated 29.6.04, the defendant, along with her husband
Shri Narender Gupta, tried to put her locks on the institute, a Civil Suit was
filed by the defendant against her. During pendency of the suit, the plaintiff
executed a Sale Deed on 13.8.04, in view of the compromise between the
parties, after receiving the entire balance consideration of Rs. 14.00 lacs.
In view of the terms and settlement of the issues, the suit was disposed of on
16.10.2004.

4\. On 17.1.2006, a Civil Suit being Suit No. 16/06 was filed by the plaintiff
alleging that a sum of Rs. 12.00 lacs was still due to her towards the sale
consideration. The suit filed by the plaintiff was decreed. The stand taken by
the defendant is that in view of earlier suit No. 16/06, filed by the
plaintiff for recovery of money, the present suit was hit by the principles of
res judicata and was otherwise not maintainable as all her claims in „Takshila
Institute‟ stood satisfied in terms of agreement dated 29.6.04.

5\. The Biyana Agreement dated 29.06.2004 has been reproduced in the judgment
of the learned Single Judge Material parts of the agreement read as under:-

RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 5 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta "1. That the
Property/UNDIVIDED HALF SHARE SECOND FLOOR (WITHOUT ROOF RIGHTS) OF BUILT UP
PROPERTY BEARING NO.8, POCKET & BLOCK C-9, SECTOR-8, ROHINI, DELHI-110085,
BUILT ON A PLOT OF LAND AREA MEASURING 158.98 SQ. MTRS. AND 50% Share of
M/s.Takshila Institute, established in the above said property which is hereby
agreed to be sold includes all rights, titles, interests, goodwill,
electricity equipment, furniture, fixtures including, passages, easements,
facilities, privileges etc. which are attached thereto or connected therewith.

13\. That the Property hereby sold includes the Goodwill of the firm
M/S.Takshila Institute, having its office at C-9/8, Sector-8, Rohini,
Delhi-85, in which the first party is also the partner of 50%. Moreover it is
specifically agreed by the first party that the property includes all rights
interest, claims, title, furniture, fitting and all furniture, fixture and all
equipments of M/S. Takshila Institute."

6\. Admittedly a receipt was also executed by the plaintiff/appellant on 29th
June, 2004. The relevant portion of the receipt read as under:-

> "RECEIPT I/We, SMT. ALKA GUPTA W/O. DR. NAVINDU GUPTA R/O. H.NO.81, DEEPALI,
> PITAMPURA, DELHI; do hereby acknowledge and confirm that I/We have received
> from SH.NARENDER GUPTA, S/O. SH. S.P.GUPTA R/O. E-20/63, SECTOR-3, ROHINI,
> DELHI-110085, a sum of Rs.7,50,000/-

.................................................................. being
advance/bayana towards the sale of UNDIVIDED HALF SHARE SECOND FLOOR (WITHOUT
ROOF RIGHTS) OF BUILT UP PROPERTY BEARING NO.8, POCKET & BLOCK C-9, SECTOR-8,
ROHINI, RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 6 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta
DELHI-110085, BUILT ON A PLOT OF LAND AREA MEASURING 158.87 SQ.MTSR. and 50%
Share of M/S. Takshila Institute, established in the above said property which
is includes all rights, titles, interests, goodwill, electricity equipment,
furniture, fixtures including passages, easements, facilities, privileges etc.
which are attached thereto or connected therewith in this premises."

7\. Paras 4, 5, 6, 8 & 9 of the plaint in Civil Suit No.16/2006, to the extent
they are relevant, filed by the appellant/plaintiff read as under:-

> "4. That an Agreement to Sell dated 29.06.2004, called the „Bayana
> Agreement‟ had taken place between the defendant and the plaintiff at Delhi
> in respect of undivided half share of the plaintiff in respect of the Second
> Floor of the built up property, without roof rights, bearing no.8, Pocket &
> Block C- 9, Sector-8, Rohini, Delhi 110 085. The said agreement has been
> annexed herewith this plaint.

> 5\. That under the said Agreement, in consideration of the sale of the half
> share of the plaintiff in the said property, including the goodwill, rights,
> interest, claims, title furniture, fixtures, fittings and equipment of the
> Partnership Firm doing business from the said address under the name and
> style of M/s.Takshila Institute, the defendant had agreed to pay to the
> plaintiff a sum of Rs.21.5 lacs. The defendant admitted this fact at para 10
> of the plaint dated 30.7.2004 of his suit no. 438/2004, which is reproduced
> as follows:

> 10\. That the defendant No.1 executed a BAYANA Agreement dated 29.06.2004
> for the sale of her rights, title and interest in the built up premises in
> which the Takshila Institute is housed at present, that is, 2nd floor of the
> property bearing no.8, Pocket and Block C-9, Sector-8, Rohini, and also the
> goodwill, RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 7 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta
> title, interests in the Takshila Institute, in favour of the plaintiff No.1,
> true copy of the said Agreement is annexed hereto and marked as Annexure
> XIV, and received Rs.7.5 lacs has advance money for which she executed a
> proper receipt copy whereof is annexed hereto and marked as Annexure XV.
> That under the above said agreement the residue amount of Rs.14 lacs is to
> be paid to the defendant no.1 on or before 29.8.2004.

> 6\. That the price of the share of the plaintiff in the above said immovable
> property had been agreed between them as Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lacs
> Only), and the balance amount of Rs.19.5 lacs (Rupees Nineteen Lacs fifty
> Thousand only) had been agreed by the defendant to be paid to her in lieu of
> her share of the goodwill of the Takshila Institute, her share in the
> furniture, fittings, intellectual property in the form of Course Materials
> developed for the students and her future rights in the Takshila Institute."

> 8\. That the plaintiff executed a Sale Deed in respect of her share of the
> immovable property mentioned above in favour of the defendant on 13.08.2004
> for the sum of Rs. Two Lakh stipulated for it. The defendant promised to pay
> her the balance of Rs. 12,00,000/- (Rs. Twelve Lakh Only) towards her
> further rights and interests stated above in Takshila Institute. However,
> the defendant had apparently had no intention to fully honour the „Bayana
> Agreement dated 29.06.2004, and began to avoid the plaintiff and her demands
> on one pretext or the year.

> 9\. That under the circumstances, the defendant has paid to the plaintiff
> only Rs. 9.5 Lakh out of the agreed consideration of Rs. 21.5 Lakh, that is,
> Rs.

Two Lakh only for the share of the plaintiff in the said immovable property,
and a sum of Rs. 7.5 Lakh towards part payment for her agreed further rights
in Takshila Institute leaving the balance of Rs. 12 Lakh due upon him. The
further rights of the RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 8 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender
Kumar Gupta plaintiff include, but are not limited to her share of the
goodwill of Takshila Institute. The plaintiff is entitled to recover the said
amount from the defendant with interest and costs."

8\. A perusal of the above referred documents would clearly show that the
plaintiff/appellant had agreed to sell (i) her undivided half share in second
floor of built up property No.8, Pocket and Block C-9, Sector 8, Rohini and
(ii) her 50% share in the partnership firm M/s Takshila Institute, including
all her rights, title, interest, goodwill etc., to the defendant/respondent.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the
plaintiff/appellant had sold her right, title and goodwill etc. only in
respect of the Institute being run in Rohini and not in respect of her share
in the entire business of the partnership firm cannot be accepted. Admittedly,
there was only one partnership between the parties. There were no separate
partnerships for the Institute in Rohini and Paschim Vihar. The
plaintiff/appellant expressly sold her half share in the goodwill of the firm
to the respondent. The goodwill can be only of the firm name and there can‟t
be separate goodwills for different Institutes being run by the firm under the
same name and style. The partnership firm was being run under the name and
style of M/s Takshila Institute, therefore, the goodwill could be only of
Takshila Institute as a whole. The very RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 9 of 20 Alka
Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta fact that the goodwill of the partnership firm
was also sold by the appellant to the respondent, in addition to equipment,
furniture, fixtures etc. is a strong indicator of the fact that what the
appellant had relinquished/sold was all her right, title and interest in the
entire partnership firm and not only in one of the two Institutes being run by
it.

9\. The view being taken by us finds support from the specific averments made
in para 5, 6, 8 & 9 of the plaint of Suit No. 16/2006 filed by the
plaintiff/appellant. In para 6 of the plaint, she specifically averred that
the balance amount of Rs.19.5 lakhs had been agreed to be paid to her in lieu
of her share in the furniture, fittings, intellectual property in the form of
course material developed for the students and her future rights in the
Takshila Institute. In paragraph 8 of the plaint, the plaintiff/appellant
specifically averred that the defendant/respondent had promised to pay her the
balance of Rs.12 lakhs towards her further rights and interests in Takshila
Institute. In paragraph 9 of the plaint, it was reiterated that the defendant
has paid to the plaintiff only Rs.9.5 lakhs, that is, Rs.2 lakhs for the share
of the plaintiff in the annual property and a sum of Rs.7.5 lakhs towards
part-payment for her agreed further rights in Takshila Institute. RFA(OS)
60/2009 Page 10 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta

10\. The plaint was drafted by a lawyer and not by a layman. Had the Biyana
Agreement dated 29th June, 2004 been confined to the share of the
plaintiff/appellant in the business being run by the firm in Rohini and had
not included her share in the business being run by the firm in Paschim Vihar,
the appellant/plaintiff would have specifically stated so in the plaint.

11\. We find that this has never been the case of the plaintiff/appellant, at
any point of time, that vide Bayana Agreement dated 29.06.04 she had sold her
right, title and interest only in respect of that business of the partnership
firm which was being run in Rohini and she continued to be entitled to the
profits earned by the partnership firm from the business which was being run
by it at Paschim Vihar. A perusal of the notice dated 8th March, 2005, alleged
to have been sent by the appellant to the respondent, a copy of which has been
filed by the plaintiff/appellant herself, would show that she did not claim
that she had settled only her share in the profits of the business being run
by the firm in Rohini and what remained to be paid to her was her share in the
profits of the business being run by the firm at Paschim Vihar. Her claim was
that she was entitled to rendition of accounts for the entire business of the
firm. This is yet another circumstance which shows that the agreement dated
29th June, RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 11 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta
2004 related to share of the plaintiff/appellant in respect of entire business
of the partnership firm and was not confined to the business being run by it
in Rohini.

12\. Even in the plaint of Suit No.302/2007 which has been dismissed by the
learned Single Judge vide impugned judgment dated 13th March, 2009, the
plaintiff/appellant has nowhere stated that she had sold her right, title and
interest in respect of the business being run by the firm at Rohini, and
therefore, she was entitled to rendition of accounts in respect of the
business being run by the firm in Paschim Vihar. The case set up by her is
that she was entitled to but has not been given a share in all the profits
earned by the partnership firm.

13\. Admittedly, the plaintiff/appellant and defendant/respondent had written
a joint letter to the Manager, Punjab National Bank, Paschim Vihar on 13th
August, 2004 informing him that they did not intend to continue operation of
the bank account which may be closed and the proceeds of the account may be
transferred to SB Account No.2107. This letter is yet another strong indicator
that the plaintiff/appellant had sold all her right, title, interest and
claims in the entire partnership firm, to the respondent, vide Bayana
Agreement dated 29th June, 2004 and that was the reason why the joint account
being operated by both of them was closed. RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 12 of 20 Alka
Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta Had the accounts in respect of Paschim Vihar
business also not been settled, there would have been no occasion for the
parties to close the account which was being jointly operated by them.

14\. This is not the case of the plaintiff/appellant that the firm was
maintaining separate accounts, one for the business being run by it in Rohini
and the other for the business being run in Paschim Vihar. Ordinarily, when
there is a Settlement between the partners of the firm whereby they agree to
part ways, the Settlement effected between them would cover accounts of the
entire business being run by them in partnership and it would not be confined
only to one part of the business. This is more so when the document executed
between the parties at the time of parting ways and setting the disputes does
not reserve any right in favour of the outgoing partner, to receive any
further payment from the partner who retains the business of the erstwhile
firm. In none of the documents executed between the parties, there is an
averment that the accounts of business being run in Paschim Vihar had not been
settled or that the plaintiff/appellant would not, in addition to the sum
referred in the document, also be entitled to share of the profit earned by
the firm from its business in Paschim Vihar. Vide endorsement made on the
receipt dated 29.6.2004, the husband of the appellant recorded that Paschim
Vihar Institute Deed would be RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 13 of 20 Alka Gupta v.
Narender Kumar Gupta settled in the name of Dr.Rashmi Gupta for the
consideration of Rs.15 lakhs. This is yet another proof of the fact that the
matter relating to Paschim Vihar Institute had also been finally settled
between the parties. During the course of arguments before us, it was
contended by learned counsel for the appellant that the endorsement was made
by the husband of the appellant without authority from her. Since we noticed a
Gentleman giving instructions to the learned counsel for the appellant, during
the course of the hearing before us, we asked her as to who the gentleman was
and we were told that he was none other than the husband of the appellant.
This leaves no doubt in our mind that the husband of the appellant was acting
on authority from her when he made endorsements on the Bayana Agreement and
Receipt dated 29.6.2004. The shifting stands taken before him have been noted
in detail, by the learned Single Judge.

15\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraphs, we are in agreement
with the learned Single Judge in holding that the plaintiff/appellant having
sold all her right, title and interest including goodwill of the partnership
firm to the respondent/defendant vide Bayana Agreement dated 29th June, 2004,
nothing remained for the defendant/respondent to account for to
plaintiff/appellant. At this stage, we would like to note that RFA(OS) 60/2009
Page 14 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta the sale consideration for
the share of the plaintiff/appellant in the immovable property was only
Rs.2,00,000/- as is evident from the sale deed executed by her. Obviously, the
remaining amount represented her share in the profit, goodwill and assets of
the firm. The suit for rendition of account does not lie, in view of
settlement between the parties.

As regards claim for rendition of accounts in respect of business carried by
the respondent under the name and style of M/s. „Taxila Institute‟,
admittedly, the Appellant was not a partner in that business. Her claim for a
share in the profits of this firm is based on the allegation that he had used
a name identical to the name „Takshila Institute‟, in which both of them were
partners. The goodwill of the firm belonged to both the parties till
29.6.2004, when it came to be vested solely in the respondent. The cause of
action for using a name similar to the name „Takshila Institute‟ being an
altogether different cause of action, requiring different pleading with
complete particulars of the alleged business and leading altogether different
evidence, it is open to the appellant/plaintiff to file a separate suit in
this regard, if such a relief is otherwise available to her in law. In any
case, no arguments on this aspect were advanced either before the learned
Single Judge or before us.

RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 15 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta

16\. Suit No.16/2006 was filed by the plaintiff/appellant on 17 th January,
2006 on the averments that she had entered into a partnership with the
defendant/respondent under the name and style of Takshila Institute and had
jointly acquired immovable properties including second floor of built up
property No.8, Pocket and Block C-9, Sector 8, Rohini and that the defendant
had not so far rendered accounts and given her share of profits and assets of
the partnership firm to her despite her demand for the same. She further
alleged that she executed the sale deed in respect of her share of the
immovable property believing the promise of the defendant to pay the balance
amount of Rs.12,00,000/- towards her further rights and interest in Takshila
Institute. Despite these averments, the plaintiff chose to claim only a sum of
Rs.12,00,000/- from the defendant/respondent alongwith a sum of Rs.1,53,000/-
as interest on the amount of Rs.12,00,000/-. The plaintiff neither claimed
rendition of account nor did she seek leave of the court to sue afterwards,
for relief of rendition of accounts.

17\. Order II Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to the extent it is
relevant, reads as under:-

2\. Suit to include the whole claim. -

(1) Every suit shall include the whole of the claim which the plaintiff is
entitled to make in respect of the cause of action; but a plaintiff may
relinquish RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 16 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta
any portion of his claim in order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of
any Court.

(2) Relinquishment of part of claim

\- Where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally
relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not afterwards sue in respect
of the portion so omitted or relinquished.

(3) Omission to sue for one of several reliefs. - A person entitled to more
than one relief in respect of the same cause of action may sue for all or any
of such reliefs, but if he omits, except with the leave of the court, to sue
for all such reliefs, he shall not afterwards sue for any relief so omitted."

The cause of action in the two suits may be the same though the facts alleged
may not be exactly identical in the two cases. It is not open to the plaintiff
to split up the parts that really constitute the same cause of action and file
different suits in respect of different parts. If the foundation of the
previously instituted suit and the subsequently instituted suit is one and the
same, Order II Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, would come in to play
and preclude the filing of the second suit. A perusal of the Affidavit filed
by the plaintiff/appellant in suit No.16/2006 instituted by her, would show
that she did not confine her deposition to the Bayana Agreement dated
29.6.2004. In fact, she started with constitution of partnership firm vide
Agreement dated RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 17 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar
Gupta 5.4.2000 and claimed that there was no formal dissolution of the
partnership and the defendant had not rendered accounts and given her shares
of profits and assets of the partnership, despite her demand for the same.

18\. The foundation of action for claiming a sum of Rs.12,00,000/- as well as
for claiming rendition of account is the same, i.e., partnership deed between
the parties to run business under the name and style of M/s Takshila
Institute. Had there been no partnership between the parties, there would have
been no occasion for execution of Bayana Agreement and receipt dated 29th
June, 2004 nor would there have been any occasion for the plaintiff/appellant
to claim rendition of accounts. Accepting that the relief of recovery of
Rs.12,00,000/- and relief for rendition of accounts are separate reliefs, the
plaintiff/appellant was nevertheless required to claim both the reliefs in the
first suit filed by her, as basic cause of action for claiming both the
reliefs was one and the same. This is not the case of the plaintiff/appellant
that cause of action to seek rendition of account had not accrued to her
before she filed suit No.16/2006. She claims to have given notice seeking
rendition of account on 8th March, 2005. In the plaint of Suit No. 16/2006,
she specifically stated that she was entitled to rendition of accounts, for
which she reserved her right RFA(OS) 60/2009 Page 18 of 20 Alka Gupta v.
Narender Kumar Gupta to file a separate suit. Cause of action for claiming
rendition of account having already accrued to her at that time, she was
obliged, in law, to claim that relief in suit No.16/2006, unless she obtained
leave of the court to sue at a later date, for relief of rendition of
accounts. Unilateral reservation of right to sue at a later date does not
entitle the plaintiff/appellant to file a fresh suit at a later date, for
rendition of accounts. Accepting the contention that the plaintiff/appellant
was not obliged to sue for rendition of account while filing of Suit
No.16/2006 and she could, in law, seek rendition of account at a later date,
within the prescribed period of limitation available to her for this purpose,
would result in multiplicity of legal proceedings which would defeat the very
purpose behind enactment of Order II Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure
i.e. to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.

19\. Admittedly, the plaintiff/appellant was a Government teacher when she
entered into partnership with the defendant/respondent and she continued to
hold that post during subsistence of partnership. It has not been disputed
before us that under the rules applicable to her, the plaintiff/appellant
could not have entered into partnership to do business. She being a Government
servant, applicable rules precluded her from doing any business. The
plaintiff/appellant acted in total breach of the Conduct Rules RFA(OS) 60/2009
Page 19 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta applicable to her by starting
a firm in partnership with the respondent. The learned Single Judge has taken
the view that the plaintiff/appellant having violated her terms of employment
by entering into partnership with the defendant/respondent, the Court would
not come to her assistance. Since we have agreed with the learned Single Judge
in holding that the suit is barred by Order II Rule 2 of the Code of Civil
Procedure that the plaintiff/appellant had settled all her claims with the
respondent/defendant, under Bayana Agreement dated 29.6.2004, we need not take
a view on the question as to whether a partnership Agreement of this nature
can be enforced in a Court of Law or not.

For the reasons stated above, we do not find any merit in the Appeal, the same
is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.

(V.K. JAIN) JUDGE (VIKRAMAJIT SEN) JUDGE September 7, 2009/acm/sn/sk RFA(OS)
60/2009 Page 20 of 20 Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta

