

Delhi High Court

Time Warner Entertainment ... vs Rpg Netcom Ltd. on 29 February, 2008

Author: S R Bhat

Bench: S R Bhat

JUDGMENT S. Ravindra Bhat, J.

1\. The Plaintiffs in the present Civil Suit seek a decree of permanent
injunction restraining the Defendant from telecasting or broadcasting on their
cable network any cinematograph film, the copyright in which vests in them.
They also seek from this Court, a decree directing the Defendant to hand over
possession of infringing copies and a decree in their favor for the profits
made by the Defendant.

2\. The facts of the case may be summarized as follows. The Plaintiffs, US
based corporations, along with their affiliated companies and concerns are
carrying on business of film production. They own various interests in and to
the copyright in the films produced by them. It is averred that investigations
conducted at the behest of the Plaintiffs revealed that Defendants were
exhibiting films on its network. The copyrights in those works belong to the
Plaintiffs and the defendants were exhibiting them without licenses. The
Plaintiffs also allege that most of the times the films so shown were pirated
copies of their works. In relation to these causes, the plaintiffs have
approached this Court, claiming perpetual injunction to restrain the defendant
from committing acts of infringement. Their claims, they submit in the present
action are not limited to existing films in which copyright subsists but also
in relation to future works.

3\. The Plaintiffs aver that by virtue of their films having been published in
a country included in the First schedule of the International Copyright Order,
1991, read with the relevant provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957 (hereafter
referred to as the Act), they have exclusive claims to the rights mentioned in
Section 14 of the Act. The Plaintiffs aver as to the complex nature of the
film production process, the various stages of release of the films, the
distribution networks and the impact of new media on the film industry.
Especially, they aver as to the impact of the cable television revolution on
the film industry and the subsequent need to protect the interests of the
producers in the said works. They aver that such unauthorized telecasting of
their works causes irreparable harm and injury to them. The plaintiffs submit
that this trend not merely affects their rights in the existing titles but
also affects their future releases. They insist that even one unauthorized
telecast is capable of reaching several thousand homes and to that extent they
suffer huge losses in relation to release and sale rights.

4\. The Plaintiffs have relied on a number of newspaper reports and
proceedings at National Conference on Challenges to Indian Cinema in relation
to the impact of cable television on film producers. Relying on the website of
the Defendant, they submit that the latter has a 75% cable market share in
Calcutta and is providing cable signals to 216 franchisees covering more than
2200 cable operators. The plaintiffs also allege that the Defendant intended
to launch a joint venture company with M/s Satyam Infoway Ltd. to provide
value added services, including video on demand. Emphasizing the need for a
regulator to monitor the content of the cable network providers, the
plaintiffs aver that the cable operators thrive in a culture of impunity as it
is very difficult for Plaintiffs to collect evidence of such unauthorized
licensing and police the network.

5\. The Defendant avers that the suit is liable to be dismissed for non-
joinder of necessary parties to the present action. It alleges that the suit
discloses no cause of action against it and that all allegations made in the
plaint pertain to a cable operator in New Alipore, Kolkata. The Defendant
submits that it is registered as a Cable TV operator under the Cable TV
Networks (Regulations) Act, 1995 (hereafter referred to as the Cable TV Act).
It submits that it only receives satellite/terrestrial transmission of various
channels and carries television software produced by independent production
houses and delivers the same at the Signal Injection Point of various other
cable operators.

Thereafter, these signals are relayed to individual subscribers. It submits
that it has no control over these Cable Operators, as far as the programmes
aired by them are concerned.

6\. The defendants further submit that Ms. Dalia Sen Oberoi cannot act as the
constituted attorney of the Plaintiffs as she had been a lawyer with the law
firm engaged by the Plaintiffs to file the present case. It is also submitted
that the Power of Attorney filed by the Plaintiff is neither stamped nor
proper and is not admissible as evidence.

7\. After filing their written statement, the defendants stopped appearing in
the proceedings. They were, consequently, set down ex-parte. The plaintiffs
were permitted to lead affidavit evidence.

8\. The Plaintiffs have filed evidence by way of affidavit (Exhibit PW 1/X)
and the same was recorded in Court on 18th September 2007. They have also
filed copies of Power of Attorney in favor of Mr. Kapil Saha (Exhibit PW 1/2),
a list of titles in which they own copyright (Exhibit PW 1/3), a compact disc
containing the list of films (Exhibit PW 1/4) and also photocopies of
certificates of the Censor Board in relation to some of the aforesaid films.

9\. Section 13(1)(b) of the Copyright Act, 1957 provides that copyright
subsists in cinematograph films. According to Section 14, "copyright" means
the exclusive right subject to the provisions of the Act, to do or authorize
the doing of anything (in the case of cinematograph films) to make a copy of
the film, including a photograph of any image forming part thereof; to sell or
give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film, regardless of
whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier occasions and to
communicate the film to the public.

10\. The plaintiffs have averred that they own copyright in relation to the
cinematograph works mentioned in the annexure to the suit. It is also averred,
and the plaintiffs witness has deposed in that regard, that the defendant
indulged in acts of infringement on the various dates specified, by exhibiting
the cinematograph works in its system, without license. The defense of the
defendant is that it only provides content to the other cable operators, but
has no control over their activities.

11\. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 (hereafter "the
Cable Act"), provides, by Section 2(c) that cable television network means any
system consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, control and distribution equipment, designed to provide cable
service for reception by multiple subscribers. Section 21 of the Cable Act
provides that the application of other laws, including the Copyright Act is
not barred. Rule 6(3) of the Cable Television Network Rules, 1994 states that:

No cable operator shall carry or include on his cable service any programme in
respect of which copyright subsists under the Copyright Act, 1957 unless he
has been granted a license by owners of copyright under that Act in respect of
such programme.

12\. There can be no denial of the fact that the defendant is a cable
television network owner, in terms of Section 2(c) of the Cable Act; it is
therefore in control of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, and owns control and distribution equipment, designed to provide
cable service for reception by multiple subscribers. That some of these
subscribers happen to be cable operators, who are able to manipulate the
system, or indulge in acts of piracy, is no excuse for the defendant, in law.
Its primary obligation is to ensure that the closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation are carried out in such manner as to not result
in violation of others rights, in existing laws, such as the Copyright Act.

13\. As far as multiplicity of plaintiffs and their common representation in
the proceedings are concerned, the provision of Order 1 Rule 1 CPC enables
several parties to join as plaintiffs, all persons under the right to relief
in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of
acts or transactions exists. In view of this provision, and Section 134(4) of
the Trade and Merchandise Marks, 1999, since the plaintiffs have offices in
New Delhi, this Court possesses jurisdiction to try the suit.

14\. During the submissions, the counsel for plaintiffs had restricted the
claim to the decree for injunction, in respect of the plaintiffs specified and
future works. This Court is of the opinion that the plaintiffs have
established a case for grant of injunction as regards the existing and
specified titles. However, as far as future works are concerned, the relief
would be based on assumption of future violation by the defendants. No
evidence is forthcoming that the defendants business, or process of carrying
on business is such that there is imminent threat of infringement. In any
case, the plaintiff has not established how injunctions for anticipated
threats to future properties can be granted.

15\. In view of the above discussion, and the fact that the defendant has not
stepped forward to refute the allegations of the plaintiff, deposed by its
witness, the court finds for the plaintiff. Accordingly, the court issues a
permanent injunction against the defendant, its servants, agents,
distributors, etc, restraining them from doing any act, or transmitting
signals or broadcasting, or carrying in its network, any cinematograph film or
work mentioned in the Annexure to the suit, without prior license of the
plaintiff.

16\. The suit is decreed in the above terms. No costs.

