

Andhra High Court

Mancherla Narasimham vs Mahabubunnissa Begum on 12 April, 1962

Equivalent citations: AIR 1963 AP 24

Bench: Seshachalapati, E Venkatesam

JUDGMENT

1\. The above revision petition has been referred to a bench at the instance
of our learned brother Satyanarayana Raju, J., who felt that there was an
apparent conflict between the views represented by the decision in Sreenivasa
Rao v. Adbul Rahim Saheb, 1956-2 Mad LJ 189 : (AIR 1956 Mad 618) and Nainumal
v. Subba Kao, 1957-2 Andh WR 53 : ( (S) AIR 1957 Andh Pra 546) (FB).

2\. The facts relevant for the disposal of this revision petition may be
stated briefly: The plaintiff borrowed a sum of Rs. 2,500/- on 24-12-1951,
from the defendant, Kancherla Narasimbam, and executed a mortgage to secure
repayment of the said sum stipulating to pay an interest of 12 per cent per
annum. On 26-12-1951 the plaintiff borrowed from the defendant a sum at Rs.
1,500/,-and executed a promissory note in his favour agreeing to pay 12 per
cent interest per annum. On 12-2-1954, the plaintiff sent a sum of Rs. 1,100/-
by bank draft towards the promissory note, which was credited to the principal
due-thereunder. On 23-6-1954, the plaintiff sent another sum of Rs. 1,900/-
towards the debt due under the mortgage. On 16-8-1954 she sent a further sum
of Rs. 1,400/- by a bank draft. These payments are not in dispute. There is,
however, a controversy as to the appropriation of the sum of Rs. 1,400/- sent
by bank draft, which will be referred to later.

3\. The defendant instituted O. S. No. 224 of 1955, on the file of the
District Munsif's Court, Bhimavaram, for the recovery of the money due under
the mortgage executed by the plaintiff on 24-12-1951. The present plaintiff
contested that suit inter alia on the ground that out of Rs 1,400/- sent by
bank draft the defendant should have credited only Rs. 568-12-9 towards the
interest at the rate of 5 1/2 per cent per annum as permitted under Act IV of
1938 instead of Rs. 859-11-0 which he actually credited and that the balance
between the latter and the former should! have been credited towards the
mortgage. In that suit, however, this question was not gone into and the
plaintiff was given liberty to file a suit for the recovery of the dues of Rs.
273-14-6. The mortgage suit ended in a decree and we are not concerned with it
in the present proceedings.

4\. The plaintiff has now launched the present action for the recovery of Rs.
300-11-0, representing the said sum of Rs. 272-14-6 and subsequent interest
thereon at the rate of Rs. 5 1/2 per cent per annum. The plaintiff's case is
that the defendant knew that she was an agriculturist, that in law he was not
entitled to take more than 5 1/2 per cent on the promissory note loan, that
when he received Rs. 1,400/- by bank draft there was an agreement that he
would collect interest only at 5 1/2 per cent and that in derogation of such
an agreement, he credited towards the promissory note the sum of Rs. 859-11-0
at the contract rate, and that, therefore, the plaintiff is entitled to
recover the difference.

5\. The defendant denied that there was any such agreement and haa also
pleaded that, inasmuch the promissory note loan was fully adjusted and
discharged, it was not open to the plaintiff to seek to recover any excess as
prayed for in the plaint. He also raised the question that the present suit is
barred by reason of the decision in O. S. No. 224 of 1955.

6\. Upon those contentions, the learned District Munsif formulated the
following two points for determination: -

(i) Is the plaintiff entitled to ask the defendant to reopen the transaction
and claim to recover the suit amount?

(ii) Does the decision in 0. S. No. 244 of 1955, District Munsif's Court
Bhimavaram, operate as res judicata, and bar the present suit?

On the second point, the learned District Munsif held that the decision in O.
S. No. 224 of 1955, does not operate as res judicata in respect of the present
suit and, therefore, it is maintainable. That finding is not canvassed before
us.

7\. The controversy really centres round the learned District Munsif's finding
on the first point. The learned District Munsif has held that in the instant
case the defendant was bound to collect only 5 1/2 per cent as interest on the
amount lent on the promissory note and when the plaintiff had admittedly sent
Rs. 1,400/- the defendant should have credited only Rs. 568-12-9 and,
therefore the plaintiff was entitled to recover the balance. Mr. Suryanarayana
Murthy, the learned counsel for the petitioner has assailed the correctness of
the above finding.

8\. It is not in dispute that the present suit is not a proceeding under
Section 13 of Act IV of 1938. The plaintiff, therefore, cannot claim that it
is open to her to ask for the reopening of transaction in accordance with the
provisions of Section 13 of the Act. If therefore, it is not a proceeding
under the provisions of Act IV of 1938, the plaintiff will have to sustain the
action under | the general law. Under Section 72 of the Indian Contract Act,
it is open to a party to seek to recover from another any payment made under a
mistake. In Shiba. Prasad v. Srish Chandra, AIR 1949 PC 297 the Privy Council
held that in India the moneys paid under a mistake of law or of fact could be
recovered and the decisions contra of the High Court of Madras were overruled.
The question, therefore, is whether this is a suit for the recovery of money
paid by mistake of law or of fact. On her own showing the plaintiff's case is
that there was a representation at the time of the execution of the mortgage
and promissory note that the defendant would receive interest as per the
provisions of the Act; and that contrary to that agreement the defendant has
collected interest at the contract rate. The controversy between the parties
was whether the agreement pleaded by her is true or not. The learned District
Munsif found upon the evidence that the plaintiff had failed to make out that
the defendant agreed to collect interest at 5 1/2 per cent per annum,
notwithstanding the contract to the contrary in the promissory note. It is
well-known that there is nothing in the Act prohibiting the parties after the
Act came into force from entering into a contract of debt stipulating a higher
interest than this is provided under Section 13 of the Act. (vide 1957-2 Andh
WR 53 : ( (S) AIR 1957 Andh Pra 546) (FB). If, therefore, the plaintiff
contracted to pay an interest at iz per cent and she had failed to prove an
agreement or the part of the defendant to collect only the statutory rate of 5
1/2 per cent, it cannot be said that she has made the payment under a mistake
of law or of fact, such that she could recover the same in the present
proceeding.

9\. Mr. Dikshitulu, put forward, in the course of the arguments, an
alternative contention that the difference between Rs. 859-11-0 actually
credited to the promissory note and Rs. 568-12-9 should in law be regarded as
moneys had and received by the defendant to the use of the plaintiff. There is
no allegation in the plaint in this regard and the plaintiff cannot be allowed
to raise the point at this late stage.

10\. After the case has been fully argued before us, we felt that the present
revision petition was capable of being decided on the facts and the question
of the apparent conflict between the two views represented by the two
decisions noted by our learned brother in the referring order dots not fall to
be resolved in this petition. Normally, in a revision filed under Section 25
of the Small Cause Courts Act, the courts are reductant to interfere, except
in cases of grave injustice. In this case, there is an obvious misapprehension
of the legal position resulting in the miscarriage of justice and having
regard to the language of Section 25 of the Act, we think it right to
interfere-with the order of the learned District Munsif.. The revision
petition is, therefore, allowed. The-decree of the lower Court is set aside.
There shall be no order as to costs in this revision petition.

