

Bombay High Court

Twentieth Century For Film ... vs Sohail Maklai Entertainment Pvt. ... on 14
October, 2010

Bench: R. S. Dalvi

    
    
                                        1                                       NM-2847
    
    PGK
    
                IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
    
    
    
    
                                                                           
                  ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
    
    
    
    
                                                   
                    Notice of Motion No.2847 of 2010
                                   IN
                          Suit No.2692 of 2010
    
    
    
    
                                                  
    Twentieth Century for Film Corporation.             ..       Plaintiff
            V/s.
    Sohail Maklai Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. &
    anr.         ..               ..                    ..       Defendants
    
    
    
    
                                           
                              
    Dr.Veerendra Tulzapurkar, Sr. Advocate with Mr.Phiroz
    Palkhiwala i/by M/s.Neolegal Associates for Plaintiff.
                             
    Mr.Ravi Kadam, Advocate General, Mr.S.U. Kamdar, Sr.
    Advocate with Mr.Karthik Desai i/by M/s.Kartikeya &
    Associates for Defendant No.1.
                  
    
    
    Mr.Iqbal Chagla, Sr. Advocate with Ms.Madhu Gaoodia,
               
    
    
    
    Ms.Anshree Ravta, Ms.Yugundhara Khanwilkar & Mr.Vaibhav
    Bhure i/by M/s.Naik Paranjpe & Co. for Defendant No.2.
    
                   ------
    
    
    
    
    
                                     CORAM : SMT.ROSHAN DALVI, J.
    Date of reserving the order : 14th October, 2010
    Date of pronouncing the order :         14th October, 2010
    
    
    
    
    
    ORDER :
    

1.The Plaintiff claims copyright in the literary and artistic work being the
script and screenplay of its  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 2
NM-2847 film Phone Booth assigned to the Plaintiff under certain agreements.
The Plaintiff claims that the Defendants have infringed its copyright in their
film Knock Out which is to be released on Friday, the 15th October 2010. The
Plaintiff claims injunction restraining the Defendants from releasing its film
Knock Out in theatres or broadcasting or otherwise communicating it to the
public in any manner or exporting its copies so as to infringe the script,
screen, storyline and dialogues in its copyrighted work or so as to pass off
the said film as and for the Plaintiff s film as an Indian version thereof.
The Plaintiff has also prayed for an order directing the Defendants to destroy
and/or deliver the script of its film and for appointment of a Receiver in
respect thereof.

2.The Plaintiff, as the producer, is the author in respect of the
cinematographic film under Section 2(d)

(v) of the Copyright Act, 1957 (the Act), and its script as - an artistic work
under Section 2(c)(iii) of the Act. The Defendants film, if it is seen to be a
copy of the Plaintiff s film, would be an infringing copy under Section
2(m)(ii) of the Act. The Plaintiff claims to have been assigned the copyright
through one Daddy Entertainment Limited from the original author Larry Cohan
under the Agreements dated 17th December  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
16:32:19 ::: 3 NM-2847 1998 and 18th December 1998 together with the
Agreements of purchase and borrowing the rights of the film under the further
Agreement dated 18th December 1998\.

3.The Plaintiff s film Phone Booth was produced in 2002\. The Defendants film
Knock Out has been produced much later. The Plaintiff claims to have received
notice of the film in or about August 2010, upon which the Plaintiff entered
into a chain of correspondence with ig the Defendants, alleging the
infringement of its copyright and calling upon the Defendants to produce for
the Plaintiff s inspection the original film itself containing the script,
screenplay, dialogues and storyline therein. The Defendants have replied
denying any infringement but refrained from showing the Plaintiff its film or
even its written screenplay to substantiate absence of infringement of the
Plaintiff s artistic work. The correspondence is contained in 9 letters by and
between the parties prior to the filing of the suit between 9th September 2010
and 4th October 2010 resulting in the suit being filed on 6th October 2010.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        4.Aside    from     the     infringement,         the       Defendants            contend
          that the Plaintiff s action is barred by laches.                                        The
          Defendants        have     relied       upon        and    produced             certain
    
    
    
    
                                                                ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 :::
                                             4                                              NM-2847
    
          website print-outs relating to the two films.                                         The
    

Defendants have shown to Court the first of several website publications of
Times of India dated 28th September 2009, reporting that the Defendants film
is apparently a rip-off of the English flick Phone Booth (2003). Aside from
giving the cast of the films and the various roles played by the actors in the
films, it gives in one line the description of the Plaintiff s film only
thus:-

Phone Booth is about a man who is held hostage in a telephone booth by a
sniper.

It does not give the description of the Defendants film.

The next print-out dated 30th November 2009, which also does not give any
description of the Defendants film. A further print-out is dated 4th January
2010 sets out the description of the Defendants film without showing any
relationship between a man held hostage in the telephone booth by a sniper. It
makes a reference to a rumour that film is loosely based on the Plaintiff s
film but mentions that it is a hardcore political thriller and expose.

5.These website print-outs produced by the Defendants are not material showing
the description of the Defendants  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 :::
5 NM-2847 film and which could be taken to be brought to the notice and
knowledge of the Plaintiff in September 2009\. It is only on 8th June 2010
that a reference is made that promos of the Defendants film give an impression
that the makers seem impressed by the Hollywood film Phone Booth . It also
contains a clarification of the Director that there is no similarity between
the two films except that the only similarity is that the guy (Irrfan) is
trapped in a phone booth.

6.The Plaintiff could have commenced its claim upon the Defendants from that
day. There is indeed a delay between June 2010 and September 2010 though the
Plaintiff claims that it learnt about the Defendants film in August 2010.

7.The case of laches by a Defendant is to be seen along side the motive and
design of a Plaintiff. It cannot be a blackmail action taken at the eleventh
hour to set at naught of the Defendants production. Consequently, it would be
important to see whether in this case the Plaintiff s claim under its notices
to the Defendants would bar the Plaintiff s remedy because it happens to be
enforced on about the eve of the release of the Defendant s production. Of
course, a motivated case of a Plaintiff cannot be assisted by a Court in an
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 6 NM-2847 equitable order of
injunction. The test of whether the Plaintiff s case is motivated or
substantiated could only be adjudicated upon seeing the merits of the two
works. Once it is seen that an action is not only abruptly made without any
previous effort on the part of the Plaintiff to notify the Defendants about
the claim alleged by the Plaintiff, it would certainly not be countenanced by
the Court at the penultimate hour. A chain of correspondence between the
parties shows that that is not the present case.

8.My Chagla on behalf of the Defendants relied upon a number of unreported
orders of this Court in Notice of Motion No. of 2006 In Suit (L) No.2993 of
2006 dated 17th October 2006, Draft Notice of Motion No. of 2008 In Suit
Lodging No.3821 of 2008 dated 26th December 2008, Notice of Motion No. of 2009
In Suit (L) No.629 of 2009 dated 4th March 2009, Notice of Motion No.3101 of
2009 In Suit No.2199 of 2009, dated 10th September 2009, Notice of Motion
No.3391 of 2009 In Suit No.2417 of 2009, dated 4th November 2009 and Notice of
Motion No.1023 of 2010 In Suit No.980 of 2010 dated 12th April 2010. These
orders do not show that when a claim is made in correspondence with the
Defendants prior to the filing of the suit, though belatedly at the time of
the first claim, the equitable relief to the Plaintiff has to be refused. In
Suit No.  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 7 NM-2847 2961 of 2008,
a relief of injunction came to be granted a day prior to the release of the
disputed film by another order of this Court.

9.Mr.Chagla contended that there is a material suppression on the part of the
Plaintiff which must disentitle the Plaintiff from obtaining equitable relief.
That material suppression is the Plaintiff s assertion that the theme of the
film in a person being held hostage in a telephone booth is the Plaintiff s
novel idea and there has been no other film that has featured such an event as
the main theme plot, storyline or expression of ideas. The Defendants contend
that another film Liberty Stands Still conveyed such an idea earlier. The
Defendants themselves concede that that is a woman tied to a cart and held
hostage; it has no telephone booth. One of the website print-outs relied upon
by Defendant No.2 in the Affidavit-in-reply dated 11th October 2010 makes a
reference to an impression of a viewer that, in fact, Liberty Stands Still was
telephone booth. The two films have been released at about some time. It is
not for this Court to go into the chronology of those events except to see
whether the statement of the Plaintiff amounts to a material suppression so as
to amount to such fraud as to disentitle the Plaintiff to equitable relief. It
does not.

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 :::

    
    
                                                8                                             NM-2847
    
    
    
        10.To   see    the      merits,    it      has    been      insisted            upon        by
    
    
    
    
                                                                                        
          Dr.Tulzapurkar         on    behalf       of    the   Plaintiff             that        the
          Defendants       produced       their      screenplay          as      well       as      an
    
    
    
    
                                                                
          actual      copy      of     their       film     for       the         Plaintiff s
          inspection       as    well     as       for    the    Court.               This        the
    
    
    
    
                                                               
    

Defendants have done only yesterday.

11.The Court has seen the comparison table made by the Plaintiff of the
identical scenes and the scripts of the two films and has viewed both the
above films.

ig It may be mentioned that the Defendants have admitted, as reflected in the
website print-out produced by Defendant No.2 itself in its Reply about one
similarity in the two films thus:

The only similarity is that the guy (Irrfan) is trapped in a Phone Booth.

12.Consequently, the Court s impression about the two films where a guy is
trapped in a Phone Booth must determine whether or not the second film is a
copy of the first. The Defendants have, of course, emphasised various dis-
similarities in the two films to show that theirs is a separate and special
artistic work. Even if that be so, it does not really come up for the Court s
adjudication except to allow the Defendants to exhibit or broadcast such dis-
similar work. The  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 9 NM-2847
similarities in the concept of the two films must be first seen and
enumerated. Given that both the films admittedly have a theme of a guy trapped
in a Phone Booth , it has been seen that a guy, who is the protagonist of both
the films, uses the otherwise unused telephone booth in the age of mobile
telephones to hide or suppress his identify one from his wife whilst making a
telephone call to his paramour and the other partly from his wife for the same
purpose and partly because he was pursuing an unclean career in the crime of
corruption. Both are trapped into conversation with a sniper. After their
initial conversation is over, they both pick up the telephone which rings in
the booth, they both are held hostage in a long and detailed conversation
bringing to the fore their respective ill-designs. The conversation between
the caller and the protagonist are rather similar; such similarity cannot be
co-incidental. Its style as well as the content of the conversation and the
design in bringing out the conduct of the man would leave an unmistakable
impression that one was copied from the other. That is the basic concept of
the two films.

13.There are peripheral incidents; whereas a Pizza delivery man intrudes upon
the initial conversation in the former film, a man carrying a bag of ill-
gotton money intrudes upon the actor in the later film.

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 :::

10 NM-2847 Whereas the first intruder knocks on the Phone Booth, upon not
being allowed to get in, with a rod, the other uses a gun instead. In both the
cases the intruders get killed by the sniper. In both the cases the sniper
deliberately misses his target when he shoots the hostage after a prolonged
conversation. In both the cases the hostages talk to their respective girl
friends and get disturbed by other people. The Police and the media step in
and the Police try to trace the telephone line of the sniper, but are unable
to do so because of a technological ig feature by which the sniper s line
remains untraced. In both the cases the hostages obey the order of the sniper
to make declarations to the public and ultimately the confession of their evil
ways either personally or professionally upon the threat of killing their
wives.

14.Whereas in the Hollywood film the identity of the caller is kept under
wraps except for a blurred image towards the end of the film, in the Bollywood
film the identity is revealed from the inception. Whereas in the Hollywood
film the hostage uses a pistol in the Bollywood film the hostage uses the bomb
under the said circumstances.

15.In the climax, both the villains literary fall to the ground and
figuratively rise in the esteem of their  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
16:32:19 ::: 11 NM-2847 wife/people.

16.It is seen that the duration of both the films is rather different; though
the first is long enough the second is far longer for the message it conveys.
Consequently and naturally, the second has further and other aspects to convey
and portray more specially the political drama with several more characters
and scenes which are essentially embellishment and ornamentation in developing
the expression of the idea or the prime thought of the first ig film. Hence
these are the additions to the Plaintiff s film and they themselves would not
come within the mischief of the infringement of any copyright. They could be
shown, exhibited and broadcast bereft, only of expression of the idea of a
person held hostage by a snipper in a telephone booth and made to confess his
crime.

17.It is contended on behalf of the Defendants that there is no copyright in
an idea. This is partly correct. Of course, an idea cannot be owned by a
person. An idea, which is available in the world, cannot be the monopoly of
anyone. That idea can be presented by various people in various artistic work.
This essentially relates to an idea which is already available and not a theme
which is a first time production. It could be best understood by an  :::
Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 12 NM-2847 illustration. If the idea
of Mahatma Gandhi s death is to be viewed and broadcast, none would have
monopoly over it. It can be used by any one dis-similarly from the previous
users. But an idea which never was available or shown earlier is an original
work. The monopoly and consequently the copyright would be implicit in such
original work. These ideas can be understood by the distinction of a discovery
and an invention. Whatever is there but not brought out would be discovered;
but whatever is not there is invented for the first time. ig The inventor
would, therefore, alone have copyright in the expression of that invention
which is the artistic work. Hence copyright is contained in the original
expression of the idea. It is expressed in the frame of the product. It is the
thought that is sought to be portrayed and conveyed which carries a copyright
and not the original idea.

Hence whilst the idea may not be unique to the author, the image portrayed or
the expression made is essentially unique to the author. If such an expression
in the shots of a film is copied, lifted from an earlier film, the
infringement is complete.

18.The axiom was set out in University of London Press Ltd. vs. University
Tutorial Press Ltd., (1916) 2 Chancery 610 - What is worth copying is prima
facie worth protecting shows the fundamental principles of  ::: Downloaded on
- 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 13 NM-2847 what copying can be prevented as an
infringement. The test that is laid down is that a man cannot take away the
result of another man s labour, or, in other words, his property as laid down
in Hogg vs. Scott cited with approval in Murray vs. Bogue in the judgment
dated 9th December 1852 (1) Drewry 353 @ 487.

19.The Defendants contend that only a tiny part of the film no matter that it
is the basic concept of the film happens to be similar to the Plaintiff s film
and that there is no infringement of the substantial part of the Plaintiff s
film. Of course, the length of the film only shows that a rather good part of
it is additional and consequently different. Resting on the main theme, what
would be the substantial part of the copyright is to be seen.

20.In Ladbroke (Football) Ltd. vs. William Hill (Football)Ltd., 1964 AER 465
(HL), this aspect came to be considered. It was the case of reproduction of a
part of the literary work containing coupons showing matches played each week
by a firm of Bookmakers. There were various lists of selected matches for as
much as 148 different varieties of bets. A great deal of skill, judgment,
experience and work was required in designing the coupons. The infringer
adopted a closely similar form of making 15 lists as against the 16 lists  :::
Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 14 NM-2847 which were almost identical
though was not copied. Holding that that would amount to a substantial part of
the copyright which was infringed, it was observed that substantial part
depends much more on the quality than on the quantity of what he has taken.

21.Reproduction in Halsbury s Law of England, Fourth Edition 2006 Volume 9(2)
at page 316 shows the requirement of sufficient objective similarity between
two works and also some casual connection between them.

22.Consequently, it is the quality of the copied work and not the quantity
that would determine infringement of the work or substantial part thereof.

23\. How this effect is to be considered is laid down in Twentieth Century Fox
Film Corporation vs. Stonesifer, (1852) 140 F 2d 579 thus:

> The two works involved in this appeal should be considered and tested, not
> hypercritically or with meticulous scrutiny, but by the observations and
> impressions of the average reasonable reader and spectator...

24.It is upon these sound, settled principles that the two films showing the
aforesaid similarities even taking into account the aforesaid dis-
similarities,  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 15 NM-2847 have to
be adjudged as an infringement or not.

25.The test for determining the exact nature of the copyright and what
constitutes its infringement upon seeing the texts of two artistic works based
upon a single idea came to be considered in the case of R.G.

Anand Vs. M/s Delux Films (1978) 4 SCC 118 on which Mr. Chagla on behalf of
the Defendants strongly relied. In that case initially a drama and later a
film came to be made upon the idea of provincialism rampant in the Indian
mindset. It was observed that:

> "an idea, principle, theme or subject matter or historical or legendary
> facts being common property cannot be the subject matter of copyright of a
> particular person. A person may choose an idea as a subject matter and
> develop it in his own manner and give expression to the idea by keeping it
> differently from others."

What has to be seen is whether the Defendants had adopted the manner,
arrangement, situation to situation, scene to scene with minor changes,
additions or embellishments here and there.

If Defendants work is a transparent or fact or a copy of the material part of
the original it would be infringement. It would be a work described as piracy.

    
    
    
    
          Where         the       same      theme         is     presented             and        treated
    
    
    
    
                                                                        ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 :::
                                            16                                         NM-2847
    
    

differently so as to form a completely new work, there would be no
infringement.

If the totality of the impression is that the film is by and large a copy of
the original play, infringement is proved.

In that case the play was read out and the summary of the film was given. Both
dealt with the aspect of provincialism. The film also dealt with other aspects
and other ideas being the evils of society like dowry, which was a completely
different idea. Six dissimilarities were noticed.

The two works had a different story, different theme, different
characteristics and different climaxes; the central idea being provincialism.

There was no infringement of the copyright seen in the idea of provincialism.

26.This judgment has been followed in the case of Barbara Taylor Bradford Vs.
Sahara Media Entertainment Ltd. 2004 (28) PTC 474 (Cal)(DB) and NRI Film
Production Associates (P) Ltd. Vs. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation in
RFA No.67 of 2004, Karnataka, Bangalore  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
16:32:19 ::: 17 NM-2847 The idea in the former case was the women s social
position having started from scratch to reach the top taken from the previous
work A Women of Substance and in the latter an idea of traffic jams,
disruption of communication, effects of nuclear missiles etc. These were held
to be ideas with no novelty or uniqueness.

It was observed that even ideas such as prostitution, drinking and the like
(like provincialism) were not new ideas. Hence what is understood in the
concept ig idea is an idea which is as old as the hills and not a new idea
hitherto not touched upon.

27.Upon viewing the two films which was subject matter an infringement action
in Zee Telefilm Ltd. Vs. Sundial Communication Pvt. Ltd the Division Bench of
this Court considered the concept of an idea the novel idea that was an idea
developed into an expression. Hence the idea of Bal Krishna residing in a
family whose life is disturbed and solving the problems of those family
members was observed to be a novel idea developed into an expression capable
of copyright.

The Division Bench of this Court in para 28 held that though abstract idea
cannot be copyrighted, when embedded in tangible form it becomes subject of
common  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 18 NM-2847 law property
rights and protected by Courts when it is novel and new .

The Division Bench of this Court observed upon viewing both the films that the
dominant impression that the Defendants serial would create was taken from the
original work of the Plaintiff s film, despite dissimilarities therein, which
were seen to be trivial and insignificant.

    
    
        It    quoted     from   Sheldon
                                 ig              Vs.   Metro     Goldwyn            Pictures
        Corporation) 1993 (81) F 2nd 49 that:
                               
    

"it is enough that substantial parts were lifted; no play right can excuse
wrong for showing how much of his work he did not pirate."

28.The test of concluding whether the second work is a pirated copy is the
impression of the average viewer. The other test is that if those parts were
removed from the copied work whether the remainder would become meaningless
and hence what must be seen is the substance, the foundation, the kernel and
the copied work and to see if the rest can stand without it.

29.There is little doubt that a person seeing both the films at different
times would come to the unmistakable conclusion that the Defendants film is a
copy of the  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 19 NM-2847 Plaintiff
s film. That cannot be allowed to prevail in the present form.

30.Mr.Chagla s contention is that only the larger broader picture and the
ultimate message of the film in seeing whether it is a faithful reproduction
in toto of the original should be seen to conclude whether or not it is a
copy. The larger, broader picture as is that a person held hostage in a
telephone booth and the confession extracted from him and not of removing the
evil of corruption of the police and the political system.

31.The Defendants have indeed shown several dissimilarities because they are
additions to the film.

The Plaintiff has no objection to those parts being filmed or broadcast, but
without the Plaintiff s novel idea of a caller in a phone booth held hostage
by a sniper on a roof. If that portion is deleted and if the Defendants film
can be exhibited upon such editing the Plaintiffs have no complaint and the
Court cannot injunct such work. But until that is done the Defendants work
does come under the mischief of the Plaintiff s copyright in its script.

32.The Defendants contend that third party rights have been already created on
the film. The prints have been  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 20
NM-2847 delivered for exhibiting in India and abroad as is done one week prior
to the scheduled release of the film.

The Defendants contend that the prints of the film are beyond their control.
Of course no relief can be granted if third party rights are shown to have
been created. None has been shown on affidavit. The film is not released at
least in India until today. Upon a case on merits being made out that release
can be injuncted. If, however the Defendants have created any third party
rights they would not be held liable for breach of any order of injunction.

33.On merits a case for an order of injunction is made out.

34.The original novel expression of the idea in both the films of the
Plaintiff and the Defendants relate to a man held hostage in a telephone booth
by a sniper. Consequently, the injunction as prayed for in prayers

(a)(i) and (ii) are required to be granted.

35.The Defendants shall not exhibit, release for exhibition or broadcast their
film Knock Out in any jurisdiction in the present form so as to infringe the
Plaintiff s copyright in the script, screenplay, story and dialogues so as to
pass off the suit film as that of the Plaintiff s film Phone Booth without the
consent  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 ::: 21 NM-2847 of the
Plaintiff.

36.Since Affidavits have been filed by all the parties to the suit and the
claim of the respective parties is heard extensively the Notice of Motion
itself is disposed off in terms of the above reliefs.

(SMT.ROSHAN DALVI, J.)  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:32:19 :::

