

Madras High Court

M/S.Lyca Productions vs J.Manimaran on 22 February, 2018

    
    
            
    
     
    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    
    DATED: 22.02.2018
    
    CORAM
    
    THE HON'BLE MS.INDIRA BANERJEE, CHIEF JUSTICE 
    and
    THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ABDUL QUDDHOSE
    
    O.S.A.No.63 of 2018
    and CMP.Nos.3492 & 3493 of 2018
    
    M/s.Lyca Productions,
    rep. by its Producer Mr.Subash Karan,
    No.55, Block  B, 4th Floor,
    Vijayaraghava Road,
    T.Nagar (Near Vani Mahal)
    Chennai  600 017.				.. Appellant
    
    vs
    					
    1.J.Manimaran,
       Proprietor of M/s.J.S.Screens,
       Having office at Nok.12, Angalaparameswari
       4th street, M.G.R. Nagar,
       Chennai  600 078.
    
    2.M/s.Tamil Film Producer Council,
       rep. by its Secretary,
       No.14/26, Yogambal Street,
       T.Nagar, Chennai  600 017.
    
    3.M/s.Film & Television Producers Guild of South India,
       rep. by its Secretary,	  			 
       No.19, Jagadeeswaran Street,
       T.Nagar, Chennai  600 017.
    
    4.Censor Board of Film Certification,
       Shastri Bhavan,
       No.35, Haddows Road,
       Chennai  600 006.
    5.M/s.UFO Digital Cinema,
       No.53, Arunachalam Street,
       Police Quarters, Triplicane,
       Chennai  600 004.
    
    6.M/s.PXD,
       Prasad Extreme Digital Cinema Network Private Limited,
       No.28, Arunachalam Road,
       Saligramam,
       Chennai  600 093.
    
    7.M/s.QUBE,
       No.42, Dr.Ranga Road,
       Mylapore,
       Chennai  600 004.  			..	Respondents
    
    	
    	Appeal filed under Order XXXVI, Rule 9 of Original Side Rules read with Clause 15 of Letters Patent against the order dated 19.2.2018 passed in O.A.No.72 of 2018 in C.S.No.65 of 2018 on the file of this Court.
    
    	For Appellants	..  Mr.PL.Narayanan
    
    	For Respondents	..  Mr.V.Raghavachari
    			    for M/s.R.Veeramani & V.Easwaran
    			    for 1st respondent
    
    			    Mr.K.Saravanan 
    			    for 3rd respondent
    
    JUDGMENT
    

(Delivered by Ms.Indira Banerjee, Chief Justice) This appeal is against a
judgment and order dated 19.2.2018 passed by the learned Single Bench allowing
the application being O.A.No.72 of 2018, of the plaintiff, impleaded as
respondent No.1 in this appeal, for interlocutory injunction in the suit being
C.S.No.65 of 2018.

2\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 claims to be the sole proprietor of
M/s.J.S.Screens, engaged in production of Tamil feature films. According to
the plaintiff/respondent No.1, the plaintiff/ respondent No.1 has enrolled as
a member of the respondent No.3, Film and Television Producers Guild of South
India, a registered society impleaded as the third defendant in the suit. The
Registration Number of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 is 9880.

3\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1, claims to have applied for registration of
his film titled KARU with the respondent/defendant No.3 on or about
3.9.2011. It has been stated that the application for registration was
approved with effect from 28.9.2011 and the plaintiff/respondent No.1 was
given Guild Registration No.16530. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 has pleaded
that, at the material time there was no other film with the title KARU
registered with the second or the third defendant/respondent.

4\. In the plaint, it is pleaded that the third defendant/respondent is the
oldest organisation of its kind and its members comprise, inter alia, film
producers spread across South India. The third defendant/respondent safeguards
the interest of its members and acts strictly in terms of its bye-laws. As a
member of the third defendant/respondent, the plaintiff/respondent No.1 claims
entitlement to all protection and privileges as available to the members of
the third respondent/defendant. The appellant/defendant No.1, however, is not
a member of the third respondent/defendant.

5\. The second defendant/respondent, M/s.Tamil Film Producer Council, is also
a society similar to the third respondent/defendant, comprising, inter alia,
of film producers. The appellant/defendant No.1 is a member of the second
respondent/defendant.

6\. According to the plaintiff/respondent No.1, the second and the third
defendants/respondents coordinate with each other to ensure that there is no
duplication of registration of film titles. The registered title holders alone
are entitled to use the titles registered with the second and third
defendants/respondents to the exclusion of other members. The titles so
registered by members cannot be used by others, even as prefix or suffix with
other words.

7\. In paragraph (5) of the plaint, it is pleaded that after registration of
the film title KARU with the third defendant/respondent, the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 started production of a film titled KARU. The
plaintiff/respondent No.1 claims to have made huge investments for his
aforesaid film monetarily as also by way of labour, publicity, etc. It is,
however, not in dispute that the film has not yet been completed and the same
is not ready for release.

8\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 has stated that the plaintiff/respondent
No.1 was shocked and surprised to come across hoardings and advertisements in
dailies, including Daily Thanthi of a film produced by the appellant/first
defendant under the same title KARU, which is directed by one Vijay.

9\. In the plaint, it is pleaded that the appellant/first defendant is
reported to have registered its film title KARU with the second
defendant/respondent in 2017, six years after the plaintiff/respondent No.1
registered the said title with the third defendant/respondent.

10\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 contends that adoption by the
appellant/first defendant of the title KARU is unfair in view of the earlier
registration by the plaintiff/respondent No.1 in 2011, of the film titled
KARUwith the third defendant/respondent.

11\. According to the plaintiff/respondent No.1, he adopted the tile KARU
for his film in tune with the theme of the film. The title is most apt and
appropriate having regard to the story of the film. The title was, according
the plaintiff/respondent No.1, chosen after long deliberation. The
plaintiff/respondent No.1 has, in the plaint, claimed that 90% of the
production has been completed and the remaining part is likely to be completed
within a short time.

12\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 has alleged that after advertisement of the
film of the appellant/first defendant and the release of hoardings and
official teasers in internet websites, friends, well-wishers, co-producers and
financiers of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 have started making queries from
the plaintiff/respondent No.1 as to whether the plaintiff/respondent No.1 has
sold the film KARU to the appellant/first defendant, thereby causing untold
embarrassment and loss of name and reputation to the plaintiff/respondent
No.1. By a letter dated 6.5.2017, addressed to the third defendant/respondent,
the plaintiff/respondent No.1 requested the third defendant/respondent to take
steps to protect the interest of the plaintiff/respondent No.1. The third
defendant/respondent, in its turn, addressed a letter dated 26.5.2017 to the
second defendant/respondent, of which the appellant/first defendant is a
member.

13\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 has claimed that release of the film "KARU"
by the appellant/first defendant will put the plaintiff/ respondent No.1 to
loss and prejudice, which cannot be compensated in terms of money. The name
and reputation of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 as also financial investments
made by the plaintiff/respondent No.1 for his film "KARU" are in deep peril.

14\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 filed C.S.No.65 of 2018 in this Court
claiming the following reliefs:

(i) declaring that the plaintiff is the prior and registered title holder of
the Tamil feature film titled Karuand its rights, title, copyright and
nomenclature solely and exclusively belongs to the plaintiff;

(ii) grant permanent injunction, restraining defendant Nos.1, 5, 6 and 7,
their men, agents and/or anybody claiming or acting through or under them,
from in any manner imitating and infringing plaintiff's copyrights over its
original motion film titled KARU (Tamil) with any other suffix or prefix or
other word in connection to this title either in theatres, Qube, UFO, PXD or
any other mode of exhibition;

(iii) award cost of suit, and

(iv) grant such further or other relief.

15\. The plaintiff/respondent No.1 filed an interlocutory application, being
O.A.No.72 of 2018 in the said suit, praying for ad interim injunction
restraining Defendant Nos.1, 5, 6 and 7 in the suit, i.e., the appellant and
Respondent Nos.5, 6 and 7 in this appeal, their men, agents or anybody
claiming or acting through or under them from imitating and infringing in any
manner, the copyright of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 over its original
motion film titled KARU (Tamil) with any other suffix or prefix or any other
word joined to the title KARU.

16\. The appellant/first defendant affirmed a counter-affidavit to the
Interlocutory Application contending that the film produced by the
appellant/first defendant is registered as "LYCAVIN KARU" and Censor
certificate has also been obtained under the aforesaid name. The
appellant/first defendant contends that the title of the film of the
appellant/first defendant is different from the title "KARU" of the film,
which is being produced by the plaintiff/respondent No.1. The appellant/first
defendant further contends that while the film produced by the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 is a thriller, the film "LYCAVIN KARU" of the
appellant/first defendant is based on a ghost story. There is no similarity
between the two films.

17\. According to the appellant/first defendant, initially on 26.4.2017, the
second defendant/respondent had registered the title "KARU" in the name of
M/s.Think Big Studios, represented by its Partner Mr.A.L.Azhagappan.

18\. Mr.PL.Narayanan appearing on behalf of the appellant/first defendant
submitted that the appellant/first defendant modified the title of the film
after obtaining 'No objection' from M/s.Think Big Studios and registered the
title of its film as "LYCAVIN KARU" on 28.9.2017.

19\. The suit filed by the plaintiff/respondent No.1 is for an injunction
restraining, inter alia, the appellant/first defendant from imitating or
infringing plaintiff/respondent No.1's copyrights over its original motion
film titled KARU (Tamil) with any other suffix or prefix or any other word.
The plaintiff/respondent No.1 has also sought a declaration that the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 is the prior and registered title holder of the
Tamil feature film KARU and its rights, title, copyright and nomenclature.

20\. It is well settled that interim orders can only be claimed in aid of the
final reliefs in the suit. The prayer in the application was for an order
restraining the appellant/first defendant and defendants 5, 6 and
7/respondents 5, 6 and 7 from from imitating and infringing
plaintiff/respondent No.1's copyrights over its original motion film titled
KARU.

21\. Admittedly, the disputes relate only to the title KARU. It is nobody's
case that the film of the appellant/first defendant is a copy of the film that
is being produced by the plaintiff/respondent No.1. The themes of the two
films are admittedly different.

22\. In India, copyright is a statutory right recognised and protected by the
Copyright Act, 1957. Sections 13 and 14 of the Copyright Act, 1957 provide as
follows:

Section 13. Works in which copyright subsists. (1) Subject to the provisions
of this section and the other provisions of this Act, copyright shall subsist
throughout India in the following classes of works, that is to say,

(a) original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works;

(b) cinematograph films; and

(c) sound recording.

(2) Copyright shall not subsist in any work specified in sub-section (1),
other than a work to which the provisions of section 40 or section 41 apply,
unless,

(i) in the case of a published work, the work is first published in India, or
where the work is first published outside India, the author is at the date of
such publication, or in a case where the author was dead at that date, was at
the time of his death, a citizen of India;

(ii) in the case of an unpublished work other than a work of architecture, the
author is at the date of the making of the work a citizen of India or
domiciled in India; and

(iii) in the case of work of architecture, the work is located in India.

Explanation. In the case of a work of joint authorship, the conditions
conferring copyright specified in this sub-section shall be satisfied by all
the authors of the work.

(3) Copyright shall not subsist

(a) in any cinematograph film if a substantial part of the film is an
infringement of the copyright in any other work;

(b) in any sound recording made in respect of a literary, dramatic or musical
work, if in making the sound recording, copyright in such work has been
infringed.

(4) The copyright in a cinematograph film or a sound recording shall not
affect the separate copyright in any work in respect of which or a substantial
part of which, the film, or, as the case may be, the sound recording is made.

(5) In the case of work of architecture, copyright shall subsist only in the
artistic character and design and shall not extend to processes or methods of
construction.

Section 14. Meaning of copyright.-

(1) For the purposes of this Act, copyright means the exclusive right
subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of
the following acts in respect of a work or any substantial part thereof,
namely:

(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer
programme,

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in
any medium by electronic means;

(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;

(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;

(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;

(v) to make any translation of the work;

(vi) to make any adaptation of the work;

(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of
the acts specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (vi);

(b) in the case of a computer programme,

(i) to do any of the acts specified in clause (a);

(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial
rental any copy of the computer programme:

Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer
programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object of the
rental.

(c) in the case of an artistic work,

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including (A) the storing of
it in any medium by electronic or other means; or (B) depiction in three-
dimensions of a two-dimensional work; or (C) depiction in two-dimensions of a
three-dimensional work;

(ii) to communicate the work to the public;

(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;

(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;

(v) to make any adaptation of the work;

(vi) to do in relation to adaptation of the work any of the acts specified in
relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (iv);

(d) in the case of a cinematograph film,

(i) to make a copy of the film, including (A) a photograph of any image
forming part thereof; or (B) storing of it in any medium by electronic or
other means;

(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such
rental, any copy of the film;

(iii) to communicate the film to the public;

(e) in the case of a sound recording,

(i) to make any other sound recording embodying it including storing of it in
any medium by electronic or other means;

(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such
rental, any copy of the sound recording;

(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, a copy which has been sold
once shall be deemed to be a copy already in circulation.

23\. The expressions infringing copy; artistic work; cinematograph film;
dramatic work; literary work; visual recording; work; work of joint
authorship and author have been defined in Section 2 (m), (c), (f), (h),
(o), (xxa), (y), (z) and (d) of the Copyright Act, 1957 as follows:

infringing copy means, -

(i)in relation to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a
reproduction thereof otherwise than in the form of a cinematographic film;

(ii)in relation to a cinematographic film, a copy of the film made on any
medium by any means;

(iii)in relation to a sound recording, any other recording embodying the same
sound recording, made by any means;

(iv)in relation to a programme or performance in which such a broadcast
reproduction right or a performer's right subsists under the provisions of
this Act, the sound recording or a cinematographic film of such programme or
performance, if such reproduction, copy or sound recording is made or imported
in contravention of the provisions of this Act;

artistic work means,

(i)a painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a diagram, map, chart or
plan), an engraving or a photograph, whether or not any such work possesses
artistic quality;

(ii) an work of architecture; and

(iii) any other work of artistic craftsmanship;

cinematograph film means any work of visual recording and includes a sound
recording accompanying such visual recording and cinematograph shall be
construed as including any work produced by any process analogous to
cinematography including video films;

dramatic work includes any piece for recitation, choreographic work or
entertainment in dumb show, the scenic arrangement or acting, form of which is
fixed in writing or otherwise but does not include a cinematograph film;

literary work includes computer programmes, tables and compilations
including computer databases;

visual recording means the recording in any medium, by any method including
the storing of it by any electronic means, of moving images or of the
representations thereof, from which they can be perceived, reproduced or
communicated by any method.

work means any of the following works, namely:

(i)a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work;

(ii) a cinematograph film;

(iii) a sound recording;

work of joint authorship means a work produced by the collaboration of two
or more authors in which the contribution of one author is not distinct from
the contribution of the other author or authors;

author means, 

(i)in relation to a literary or dramatic work, the author of the work;

(ii) in relation to a musical work, the composer;

(iii)in relation to an artistic work other than a photograph, the artist;

(iv) in relation to a photograph, the person taking the photograph;

(v) in relation to a cinematograph film or sound recording, the producer; and
in relation to any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work which is
computer-generated, the person who causes the work to be created.

24\. Section 16 of the Copyright Act, 1957 provides that no person shall be
entitled to copyright or any similar right in any work, whether published or
unpublished, otherwise than under and in accordance with the provisions of the
said Act or of any other law for the time being in force. But nothing in
Section 16 of the Act is to be construed as abrogating any right or
jurisdiction to restrain a breach of trust or confidence.

25\. A conjoint reading of Sections 13 and 16 of the Copyright Act makes it
clear that what is protected under the Copyright Act is the work which is
relatable to a cinematograph film, that is to say, the visual recording,
including sound recording, produced by process analogous to cinematography.
The title, which may be a commonly used word, cannot be protected under the
law of copyright. Section 13 makes it clear that there is no copyright in a
title, it is the entire work which is protected by copyright.

26\. On a plain reading of Section 13 of the Copyright Act, 1957, copyright
subsists in, inter alia, original works including original literary, dramatic
and artistic works and cinematograph films. A title is not an original
literary work, as held by the Supreme Court in Krishika Lulla and others v.
Shyam Vithalrao Devkatta and another, reported in (2016) 2 SCC 521. A title
does not qualify for being described as work. It is incomplete in itself and
refers to the work that follows.

27\. In Krishika Lulla, supra, the Supreme Court was considering the title
"Desi Boyz" of the film released by the appellants on a story written by Milap
Zaveri. The Supreme Court observed that the words Desi and Boys were quite
common in India and their combination also produced a commonly understood
expression. The words were, therefore, not protectable either on the basis of
copyright or trade mark, or in passing off action.

28\. In Krishika Lulla, supra, the Supreme Court quoted and approved the
principle enunciated in the following passage from Copinger and Skone James on
Copyright, 16th Edition:

Names and titles as literary works.In the same vein is the reluctance of
English courts to confer copyright protection on titles of newspapers,
magazines, books and the like. In relation to books in particular, the title
normally forms part of a copyright work consisting of the book as a whole and
the issue here may be whether the copying of the title amounts to the taking
of a substantial part of the whole work. General statements can nevertheless
be found in non-copyright cases to the effect that there is no property in a
name or title standing alone unless it is the subject of goodwill or a
registered trade mark.

29\. In E.M.Forster v. A.N.Parasuram, reported in AIR 1964 Mad 331, a suit
filed by E.M.Forster for alleged infringement of copyright in the title of his
book "A Passage to India, the adoption of the title E.M.Forster, A Passage
to India, Everyman's Guide" by the defendants was held not to infringe
copyright as there was no copyright in respect of the title. This Court held
thus:

 As we have earlier affirmed, there is no copyright in the title and
purchasers, whether of the original work or of the guide, are most unlikely to
be illiterate, or unacquainted with English. It will be perfectly clear to
them, from the words enclosed in brackets as a subtitle, that they were
acquiring, not the original work, but a guide for university students.

30\. In Kanungo Media (P) Limited v. RGV Film Factory, reported in (2007) 1
Del 1122, A.K.Sikri, J, held as under:

12.  What, therefore, follows is that if a junior user uses the senior
user's literary title as the title of a work that by itself does not infringe
the copyright of a senior user's work since there is no copyright infringement
merely from the identity or similarity of the titles alone.

31\. In the instant case, it is not in dispute that there is no originality in
adoption of the title "KARU", which is a common Tamil word, which means
"foetus" and figuratively "concept" and/or "theme".

32\. In the proceedings before the learned Single Bench and before us, it was
the specific case of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 that the second and third
defendants/respondents were two entities with which producers of Tamil films
register the title of the films they intend to make.

33\. Mr.V.Raghavachari argued that a producer registers the title of a film
either with the second defendant/respondent or with the third
defendant/respondent. It is the practice for the second and third
defendants/respondents to exchange the names which are registered with them
and to ensure that the same title or similar titles with minor variations
and/or prefix and/or suffix are not registered by more than one producer.
Mr.Raghavachari submitted that the second defendant/respondent and the third
defendant/respondent do not issue title registration certificates without
getting clearance from each other.

34\. Mr.Raghavachari further argued that it had become an established practice
in the Cinema industry for producers to become members of organisations such
as the second and the third defendant/respondent and get the titles of films
registered and once a title was registered, no other producer could make a
film under a title that had been registered or title similar thereto. The
titles which were registered could not even be used with a suffix or prefix.

35\. Mr.PL.Narayanan appearing on behalf of the appellant/first defendant,
however, took the stand that there was no such practice in the industry. The
learned Single Bench, however, took note of the fact that the appellant/first
defendant also claimed that it had registered its title with the second
defendant/respondent to arrive at the prima facie finding that there was a
practice in the industry, as contended on behalf of the plaintiff/respondent
No.1

36\. Admittedly, the third defendant/respondent is not a registered Copyright
Society under Section 33 of the Copyright Act, 1957 and thus incompetent to
administer any right in any work including cinematograph films. There is also
no statutory basis for the alleged trade practice on the basis of which the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 has claimed relief in the suit, which is admitted.
As observed above, there is no copyright in a mere title.

37\. As argued by Mr.PL.Narayanan, the appellant/first defendant is not a
member of the third defendant/respondent with whom the plaintiff/respondent
No.1 has registered the title KARU. The appellant/first defendant is,
therefore, not bound by the rules and regulations of the third
defendant/respondent, and has no contractual obligation not to produce a film
with a title which is the same as, or similar to the title registered by the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 with the third defendant/ respondent.

38\. In the plaint and in the application for interim relief, the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 claimed that the plaintiff/respondent No.1 was
entitled to the protection available under the rules of the third
defendant/respondent. However, entitlements, if any, of the plaintiff/
respondent No.1 under the rules of the third defendant/respondent cannot be
enforced against third persons who are not members of the third
defendant/respondent.

39\. The film of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 has not even been completed or
released. It is nobody's case that the title has acquired any goodwill or
reputation. On the other hand, the film of the appellant/first defendant has
been completed and is due to be released. In our considered view, the balance
of convenience must weigh against the grant of an injunction in favour of the
plaintiff/respondent No.1.

40\. The judgment of the Delhi High Court in Biswaroop Roy Choudhary v. Karan
Johar, reported in 2006 (33) PTC 381 (Del.), cited by Mr.PL.Narayanan,
pertains to the Trade Marks Act, 1999, and thus clearly distinguishable.
However, we approve the principle that Courts should be wary to injunct use of
words or phrases in common parlance in respect of which a claim for exclusive
use is staked by an applicant for injunction. In the aforesaid case, the Delhi
High Court refused injunction to restrain use of the title Kabhi Alvida Naa
Kehna in a passing off action, with the observation that neither of the
parties had authored or conceived the catchy phrase which was on the lips of
any number of persons on any given day, throughout India, by reason of
popularity of a song Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna. In this case, KARU, as
observed above, is a common Tamil word which literally or scientifically means
foetus and figuratively means concept and/or theme.

41\. In T.Pandiyan Arivali v. Kamal Hassan, reported in 1995 (2) LW 347, a
Division Bench of this Court declined to grant injunction sought by the
plaintiff claiming copyright in the title of a book Magalir Mattum in Tamil,
which he had got registered with the Registrar of Copyright. The Division
Bench held:

4. It is generally acknowledged by the Court in India that the definitions in
sections 13 and 14 of the copyright act, 1957, do not go beyond the literary
work or musical work and the title ordinarily of any such work is not a part
of composition or work of the author or the composer. His workmanship is
confined to the work and not to the title. It is indeed the law that there is
no property in the name which is the term of description used to identify the
work and any other person can, with impunity, adopt it.

42\. Judicial discipline demands consistency in rendering judgments. A Bench
of the High Court cannot take a view contrary from the one taken by another
Bench of co-ordinate strength of the same High Court.

43\. It is true that not everything said by a Judge in his judgment
constitutes a precedent. What is binding is the principle on which a case is
decided. It is, therefore, important to analyse a decision and segregate the
ration decidendi, which is to be followed as a precedent.

44\. In Islamic Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka, reported in (2003)
6 SCC 697, the Supreme Court held:

139. A judgment, it is trite, is not to be read as a statute. The ratio
decidendi of a judgment is its reasoning which can be deciphered only upon
reading the same in its entirety. The ratio decidendi of a case or the
principles and reasons on which it is based is distinct from the relief
finally granted or the manner adopted for its disposal. (See Executive
Engineer, Dhenkanal Minor Irrigation Division v. N.C. Budharaj [(2001) 2 SCC
721] .)

140\. In Padma Sundara Rao v. State of T.N. [(2002) 3 SCC 533] it is stated:
(SCC p. 540, paragraph 9) There is always peril in treating the words of a
speech or judgment as though they are words in a legislative enactment, and it
is to be remembered that judicial utterances are made in the setting of the
facts of a particular case, said Lord Morris in Herrington v. British Railways
Board [(1972) 2 WLR 537 : 1972 AC 877 : (1972) 1 All ER 749 (HL)] (Sub nom
British Railways Board v. Herrington). Circumstantial flexibility, one
additional or different fact may make a world of difference between
conclusions in two cases. (See also Haryana Financial Corpn. v. Jagdamba Oil
Mills [(2002) 3 SCC 496] .)

141\. In General Electric Co. v. Renusagar Power Co. [(1987) 4 SCC 137] it was
held: (SCC p. 157, paragraph 20) As often enough pointed out by us, words and
expressions used in a judgment are not to be construed in the same manner as
statutes or as words and expressions defined in statutes.

45\. According to settled theory of precedents, every decision contains three
basic postulates,  (i) finding of facts, direct and inferential; (ii)
statements of the principles of law applicable to the legal problems that
arise in the facts of the case; and (iii) judgment based on the combined
effect of the above.

46\. As held by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Chajju Ram, reported in
(2003) 5 SCC 568, a judgment and/or decision is an authority for what it
actually decides. What is of essence is its ratio, which is the issue raised
and decided, and not every observation made in the judgment, or what logically
follows therefrom. Every judgment must be read as applicable to the particular
facts proved, or assumed to be proved. The enunciation of the reason or
principle on which a question has been decided is alone binding as a
precedent.

47\. Therefore, in order to understand and appreciate the binding force of a
decision, it may be necessary to see what were the facts in the case in which
the decision was given, and what was the point which had to be decided.

48\. In R.Radhakrishnan v. A.R.Murugadoss and the Film and Television
Producers Guild of South India, reported in AIR 2014 Mad 25, the question was
whether the respondent could be injuncted from using the title of the
applicant's film. The learned Single Bench quoted with approval the decision
of the Delhi High Court in Kanugo Media (P) Ltd. v. RGV Film Factory and
others, reported in (2007) 34 PTC 591 (Delhi), which is as follows:

"11. It is common, rather imperative, to give title to literary or
entertainment works. Like human beings, literary work produced by the author
or the work of entertainment produced by a producer needs a name. It is only
then such work would be identified. The term 'literary title' is used to
encompass titles of books, periodicals, newspapers, plays, motion pictures,
television series, signs, phonograph records, cartoon features and the like
(Mc Carthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition, Third Edition (1995) Vol.I)

12\. American Courts have taken uniform view that title alone of a literary
work cannot be protected by Copyright Law. Copying of a title alone, and not
the plot, characterization, dialogure, song etc. is not the subject of
Copyright Law. Thus, a copyright on a literary work would not include
exclusive right to use the title on any other work. What, therefore, follows
is that if a junior user uses the senior user's literary title as the title of
a work that by itself does not infringe the copyright of a senior user's work
since there is no copyright infringement merely from the identity or
similarity of the titles alone. Same is the position under Copyright Law in
India."

49\. Relying on the aforesaid judgment, the Single Bench of this Court held
that the applicant had no case on the copyright in respect of the title Raja
Rani.

50\. The ratio decidendi in R.Radhakrishnan, supra, is that there is no
copyright in the title of a literary work or a cinematograph film. This
proposition of law operates as a precedent to be followed by Bench of co-
ordinate strength

51\. In our view, judicial propriety demands that a Single Bench should follow
the verdict of the other Single Bench and if it is unable to agree, the Single
Bench should refer the matter to the Chief Justice for constitution of a
Division Bench. The learned Single Bench fell in error in holding that the
judgment of the Single Bench in R.Radha Krishnan v. A.R.Murugadoss, reported
in 2013 (5) LW 429 was distinguishable on facts. The learned Single Bench
should have appreciated minor differences like one film being a short film and
the other film being a feature film could not make any difference to the
proposition that there was no copyright to a title.

52\. A judicial decision is often read by a process of reasoning on the basis
of material facts under immediate consideration. The conclusion is the
decision. In the vast majority of cases, it will be the application of the
existing law to the facts judicially asserted. However, facts in different
cases are seldom identical. Minor differences in facts would not denude a
decision of its precedential value and in distinguishing a precedent on the
ground of factual differences, it would be necessary to clearly indicate the
distinguishing features and how the distinguishing features could have
rendered the proposition of law enunciated and/or re-enunciated in the
decision inapplicable. The learned Judge has, with the greatest of respect,
not indicated the reasons for his view that the distinguishing features noted
in the judgment under appeal render the judgments cited on behalf of the
appellant/defendant No.1, holding that there was no copyright in a title,
inapplicable.

53\. The provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957 and in particular, the wide
definition of infringing copy in relation to cinematograph film in Section
2(m)(ii), to mean a copy of the film made on any medium, by any means, makes
it clear that the proposition laid down in the judgment of this Court in
R.Radhakrishnan, supra, and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Krishika
Lulla, supra, that there is no copyright in a title, would apply to all
feature films.

54\. While it is correct to say that a judgment is to be construed and
interpreted in the background of the facts in which the judgment is rendered
and a judgment may not operate as a precedent in an altogether different
factual setting, at the same time, no two cases can be identical. Minor
differences in facts do not denude a judgment of its precedential value.

55\. A perusal of the plaint and the interlocutory application and
particularly the prayers made therein clearly indicate that the claim of the
plaintiff/first respondent was mainly based on his claim to copyright in his
film, of which the title KARU was an integral part. The plea of existence of
an established trade/industry practice was raised as an alternative
contention.

56\. We are also unable to agree with the conclusion of the learned Single
Bench that there is certainly a trade practice with regard to registration of
title for a movie in the Tamil cinema industry, as claimed by the
plaintiff/respondent No.1. There are no materials on record which conclusively
establish the existence of a practice in the industry for registration of
titles or desisting from using titles registered by others.

57\. In course of arguments, it transpired that it was not mandatory for
producers to become members of the second defendant/respondent or the third
defendant/respondent. Membership of either society was entirely optional and
there were many producers who were not members either of the second or of the
third defendant/respondent.

58\. In this context, it would be pertinent to refer to the rules and
regulations for registration of motion picture titles / video / film / album
under Titles Registration Scheme of the third defendant/respondent and in
particular the following rules:

8. If production work has not commenced during the year i.e. during the
registration period of One Year of title then renewal for another (six) 6
months only will be considered by the Executive Committee, on furnishing
satisfactory reasons, for delay in starting the production.

9\. In registering any title for a film of Guild takes no responsibility
whatsoever in regard to and infringement of copyright or any other legal right
and Titles Registration is done purely on Self Regulation Scheme, Guild does
not take any legal responsibilities pertaining to Titles Registration.

59\. From the materials disclosed before us, it has not appear that the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 commenced production within one year from the date
of registration. The materials show that film pooja was performed by the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 on 09.09.2013, even though the title was registered
on 03.11.2011. More over, as per the rules, if production work does not
commence during the year of registration, then renewal for another six months
only was to be considered by the Executive Committee on furnishing
satisfactory reasons. In any event, the third defendant/respondent takes no
responsibility whatsoever with regard to infringement of copyright or any
other legal right and title registration was done purely on Self Regulation
Scheme.

60\. Admittedly, there is no statute, rule or regulation which at all requires
the registration of a title for production of a film. Had the appellant/first
defendant and the plaintiff/respondent No.1 been members of the same
organisation, they may have contractually been bound by the internal rules and
regulations of the organisation. However, the plaintiff/respondent No.1 is not
bound by the rules of the second defendant/ respondent and the appellant/first
defendant is not bound by the rules of the third defendant/respondent.

61\. The earlier registration by the plaintiff/respondent No.1 of the title
KARU with the third defendant/respondent does not confer any right to the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 to exclusive use of the title so registered, to the
exclusion of other producers. Whether or not there is any dispute with regard
to the dates of registration of the respective titles of the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 and the appellant/first defendant, is in our view,
not material.

62\. The learned Single Bench fell in error of law in arriving at the
conclusion that the plaintiff/respondent No.1 had prima facie case as the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 had registered the title KARU for the motion
picture as early as on 03.9.2011 and had renewed the same from time to time.

63\. The learned Single Bench has apparently been swayed by the fact that the
appellant/defendant No.1 was a large production house unlike the
plaintiff/respondent No.1 and that the plaintiff/respondent No.1 had made huge
investments for production of the film KARU which was almost 90% complete.
Sympathy for a weaker party to a litigation cannot outweigh the law pronounced
by the Court. Further more, the learned Single Bench ignored the fact that the
appellant/first defendant had also made substantial investments for its film
which had been completed and was due to be released on 23.02.2018. The learned
Single Bench, in our view, also erred in law in giving undue importance to the
size of depiction of LYCAVIN before KARU since the suit was not one for
passing off.

64\. It is true that simultaneous release of cinematographic films of the same
title is likely to cause confusion in the mind of the viewers. However, in
this case the release is not simultaneous. The plaintiff/respondent No.1's
film has not been completed. In the absence of any statutory or contractual
right, the plaintiff/respondent No.1 cannot injunct others from using a title.
In any case, the title is different preceded by LYCAVIN KARU. Even assuming
that the cinematographic film of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 is 90% complete
as claimed, the film of the appellant/first defendant is complete and
scheduled to be released on 23.02.2018, which is tomorrow. We are informed
that the date of the release has likely been postponed by reason of the
interim injunction passed by the learned Single Bench. The interim order of
the learned Single Bench cannot be sustained and the same is set aside.

The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. No costs. Consequently, CMP.Nos.3492 &
3493 of 2018 are closed.

    
    
    (I.B., CJ.)              (A.Q.,J.)
                                                                                22.02.2018       
    Index	: Yes/No
    Internet	: Yes/No
    
    bbr/sasi
    
    Note: Order copy be issued on 23.02.2018.
    
    To
    
    The Sub Assistant Registrar,
    Original Side, High Court, Madras.
    
    
    The Hon'ble Chief Justice
    and             
    Abdul Quddhose, J.
    
    (bbr/sasi)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    O.S.A.No.63 of 2018
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    						22.02.2018
              

