

Calcutta High Court

Shree Balaji Steels vs Gontermann-Peipers (India) Ltd. on 15 May, 2002

Equivalent citations: 2003 114 CompCas 193 Cal, 2003 47 SCL 821 Cal

Author: T Chatterjee

Bench: T Chatterjee, J K Biswas

JUDGMENT Tarun Chatterjee, J.

1\. When some argument was advanced by learned counsel for the parties on the
question of grant of interim relief, learned counsel for the parties suggested
to us that instead of disposing of the application for grant of interim
relief, the appeal itself could be taken up for hearing by treating the appeal
on the date the application for grant of interim relief was taken up for
hearing. Accordingly the appeal was taken up for hearing along with the
application for grant of interim relief.

2\. This is an appeal from an order passed by a learned company judge of this
court on February 6, 2002 in C. P. No. 41 of 2002 whereby and whereunder the
petition for winding up filed at the instance of the petitioning
creditor/appellant was admitted for a sum of Rs. 47,74,242. It appears from
the impugned order also that the learned company judge gave liberty to the
petitioning creditor/appellant to institute such proceedings as it may be
advised to realise its alleged dues against the company, if any, either by way
of interest or otherwise. Liberty was also given to the respondent-company to
pay a sum of Rs. 5,00,000 on or before February 28, 2002. It was further
directed that the balance sum shall be paid by the company in monthly
instalments of Rs. 5,00,000 and the first of such instalment shall commence on
and from March 15, 2002, and thereafter on the 15th of each month till the
entire dues were paid. In default of any of the payments, as directed, the
petitioning creditor/appellant shall be at liberty to publish advertisements
once in The Statesman and once in Bartaman and however publication in the
Official Gazette was dispensed with.

3\. Feeling aggrieved by the impugned order of the learned company judge
refusing to grant interest at the rate of 21 per cent. per annum after expiry
of 60 days from the submission of the bill in question, this appeal has been
preferred by the petitioning creditor/appellant.

4\. Before us, Mr. Basak, learned counsel appearing for the respondent,
submitted that in view of Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act, 1932, the
application for winding up of the company filed by the petitioning creditor
which is an unregistered partnership firm was not maintainable in law. In
support of this contention Mr. Basak relied on a single Bench decision of this
court in the case of Deb Paints P. Ltd. v. Universal Lime Industries [2002]
110 Comp Cas 429; [2002] 1 Cal LT 94. Mr. Basak further contended that in view
of Rule 21 of the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959, the petition for winding up
was not maintainable in law as no leave was taken by the petitioning creditor
for filing the winding up petition by a constituted attorney of the
petitioning creditor. In support of this contention Mr. Basak relied on a
single Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of Shantilal
Khushaldas and Bros. Pvt. Ltd. v. Smt. Chandanbala Sughir Shah [1993] 77 Comp
Cas 253. So far as these submissions of Mr. Basak are concerned, Mr. Tiwari
appearing on behalf of the petitioning creditor submitted before us that this
submission cannot be permitted to be raised by the company respondent as no
appeal has been preferred against the impugned order passed by the learned
company judge. In the event we permit the respondent to raise the question of
maintainability of the winding up petition by an unregistered partnership firm
before us and in case we hold that the application for winding up of the
company at the instance of the unregistered firm is not maintainable in law,
in that case it would not be proper for us to deal with the merits of this
appeal. Before we consider whether the winding up petition at the instance of
an unregistered firm was maintainable in law or not, we may deal with another
submission of Mr. Tiwari, learned advocate appearing for the appellant that
the respondent cannot be permitted to raise the aforesaid question in appeal
as the respondent has not challenged the finding of the learned company judge
holding that the winding up petition by an unregistered firm was maintainable
in law by not filing a separate appeal. According to Mr. Tiwari, since this
question was not raised by way of an affidavit in the company court and also
not raised before the learned company judge in detail, it would not be open to
the appellate court to entertain such a plea when no appeal has been preferred
against the impugned order by the respondent. Mr. Basak appearing on behalf of
the respondent-company however submitted on instruction before us that the
company being aggrieved by the finding of the learned company judge, was
intending to file an appeal against the self-same impugned order. Be that as
it may, we are unable to accept this submission of Mr. Tiwari, appearing on
behalf of the appellant. It is well settled that an appellate court shall make
any order which ought to have been passed or made to pass or make such further
order as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the court
notwithstanding that the appeal was as to part only of the order and may be
exercised in favour of all or any of the respondents or parties, although such
respondents or parties might not have filed any appeal or objection, (see
Order 41, Rule 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure). Therefore when we find that
the jurisdiction of the company court to entertain an application for winding
up of the company at the instance of an unregistered partnership firm was an
issue, we must keep in mind the provisions of Order 41, Rule 33 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, as noted hereinearlier. Therefore, keeping the provisions
made in Order 41, Rule 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure in our mind, we must
permit the respondent to raise such a question before the appellate court.
Accordingly we are unable to accept the contention of Mr. Tiwari that since
the respondent has not filed against that part of the impugned order which had
held that the application for winding up was maintainable at the instance of
the unregistered firm, the respondent shall not be permitted to raise such
question without filing an appeal from the impugned order.

5\. Let us now revert to the main question, which is to be decided in this
appeal. The question is whether the winding up petition at the instance of an
unregistered firm was maintainable in law or not. Before we proceed further we
note the description of the petitioning creditor/appellant as would be evident
from the cause title of the petition for winding up which is as under : "Shree
Balaji Steels, a partnership firm carrying on business at 23A Netaji Subhash
Road, 1st floor, Room No. 27, Calcutta 700 001."

6\. From the aforesaid description of the partnership firm it is not possible
for us to say that the appellant is either a registered or an unregistered
firm. But Mr. Tiwari, appearing on behalf of the petitioning
creditor/appellant did not dispute that the petitioning creditor/appellant is
an unregistered firm. Such being the position we proceed to consider the case
by keeping in our mind that the petitioning creditor is an unregistered firm.
As noted hereinearlier, this appeal has been filed by the petitioning creditor
only against the refusal of the learned company judge to grant interest to the
petitioning creditor. Since the question of entertaining the winding up
petition by the learned company judge at the instance of an unregistered firm
will go to the root of the matter, we are of the view that such a question
ought to have been decided by the learned company judge by going into that
question in detail. Chapter I of Part VII of the Companies Act deals with
modes of winding up. Section 425 says that the winding up of a company may be
:

(a) by the court; or

(b) voluntary ; or

(c) subject to the supervision of the court.

7\. Sub-section (2) of Section 425 clearly says that provisions of the
Companies Act with respect to winding up apply, unless the contrary appears,
to the winding up of a company in any of the aforesaid modes. From a plain
reading of the aforesaid provisions as made in Section 425 of the Companies
Act, winding up is a means by which the dissolution of a company is brought
about and its assets realised and applied in payment of its debts and after
satisfaction of the debts the balance if any, is paid back to the members in
proportion to the contribution made by them to the capital of the company.
Chapter II deals with winding up by the court and cases in which company may
be wound up by the court. Section 433 of the Companies Act deals with
circumstances in which company may be wound up by court. They are as follows :

(a) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company may
be wound up by the court;

(b) if default is made in delivering the statutory report to the Registrar or
in holding the statutory meeting ;

(c) if the company does not commence its business within a year from its
incorporation, or suspends its business for a whole year;

(d) if the number of members is reduced, in the case of a public company,
below seven, and in the case of a private company, below two ;

(e) if the company is unable to pay its debts ;

(f) if the court is of opinion that it is just and equitable that the company
should be wound up.

8\. There is yet another section in the Companies Act which is an important
section for the purpose of deciding the question in hand. This is Section 439
of the Companies Act which runs as under :

"439. Provisions as to applications for winding up.--(1) An application to the
court for the winding up of a company shall be by petition presented, subject
to the provisions of this section,--

(a) by the company ; or

(b) by any creditor or creditors, including any contingent or prospective
creditor or creditors ; or

(c) by any contributory or contributories ; or

(d) by all or any of the parties specified in Clauses (a), (b) and (c) whether
together or separately ; or

(e) by the Registrar ; or

(f) in a case falling under Section 243, by any person authorised by the
Central Government in that behalf.

(2) A secured creditor, the holder of any debentures (including debenture
stock), whether or not any trustee or trustees have been appointed in respect
of such and other like debentures, and the trustee for the holder of
debentures, shall be deemed to be creditors within the meaning of Clause (b)
of Sub-section (1).

(3) A contributory shall be entitled to present a petition for winding up a
company, notwithstanding that he may be the holder of fully paid up shares, or
that the company may have no assets at all, or may have no surplus assets left
for distribution among the shareholders after the satisfaction of its
liabilities.

(4) A contributory shall not be entitled to present a petition for winding up
a company unless-

(a) either the number of members is reduced, in the case of a public company,
below seven, and, in the case of a private company, below two; or

(b) the shares in respect of which he is a contributory, or some of them,
either were originally allotted to him or have been held by him, and
registered in his name, for at least six months during the eighteen months
immediately before the commencement of the winding up, or have devolved on him
through the death of a former holder.

Except in the case where he is authorised in pursuance of Clause (f) of Sub-
section (1), the Registrar shall be entitled to present a petition for winding
up a company only on the grounds specified in (Clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and
(f)) of Section 433 :

Provided ....."

9\. From a plain reading of the circumstances as enumerated in Section 433 and
its sub-sections of the Companies Act, it is clear to us that Section 433 only
empowers the court to pass an order of winding up of a company in appropriate
cases. It is also clear from the provisions made in Section 433 of the
Companies Act that the principle to be followed in a winding up petition by
the court is that there is no right to a party to claim winding up on the
basis of any agreement between the company and the said party. The power to
winding up a company is only conferred on the court if the court is satisfied
that the circumstances mentioned in Section 433 of the Companies Act were
available to a person to obtain an order of winding up from the court. At this
stage we may also deal with Section 439 of the Companies Act as quoted herein-
earlier. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision made in Section 439
of the Companies Act, we are of the view that there is no restriction for an
unregistered partnership firm for presenting a winding up petition as the only
restriction made in that section is stated in Clauses (a) to (f) of Section
439 of the Companies Act which conditions in our view, cannot be made
applicable to an unregistered partnership firm. That apart Clause (b) of
Section 439(1) of the Companies Act confers wide power to any creditor or
creditors to file a winding up petition of a company. It cannot be disputed
that an unregistered partnership firm can be a creditor of a company.
Therefore, no bar has been made to present a petition for winding up by an
unregistered partnership firm ; as such an unregistered partnership firm is
also a creditor of the company sought to be wound up. Before we proceed
further, we now consider Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (in
short "the Partnership Act"), which is by far the most important section in
the whole of Chapter VII of the Partnership Act, which deals with the
registration of firms. Chapter VII of the Partnership Act deals with
registration of a firm, which contains 16 sections namely, Sections 56 to 71
of the Partnership Act. Section 69 of the Partnership Act deals with the
necessity of a firm to be registered and effect of non-registration. Section
69 of the Partnership Act runs as follows :

"69. Effect of non-registration.--(1) No suit to enforce a right arising from
a contract or conferred by this Act shall be instituted in any court by or on
behalf of any person suing as a partner in a firm against the firm or any
person alleged to be or to have been a partner in the firm unless the firm is
registered and the person suing is or has been shown in the register of firms
as a partner in the firm.

(2) No suit to enforce a right arising from a contract shall be instituted in
any court by or on behalf of a firm against any third party unless the firm is
registered and the persons suing are or have been shown in the register of
firms as partners in the firm.

(3) The provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply also to a claim of
set off or other proceeding to enforce a right arising from a contract, but
shall not effect-

(a) the enforcement of any right to sue for the dissolution of a firm or for
accounts of a dissolved firm, or any right or power to realise the property of
a dissolved firm, or

(b) the powers of an official assignee, receiver or court under the Presidency
Towns Insolvency Act, 1909 (2 of 1909), or the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920
(5 of 1920), to realise the property of an insolvent partner."

10\. From a plain reading of Sub-section (1) of Section 69 of the Partnership
Act it cannot be doubted that Section 69(1) clearly prohibits a suit to be
instituted to enforce a right arising from a contract or conferred by the
Partnership Act, in any court by or on behalf of any person suing as a partner
in a firm against the firm or any person alleged to be or to have been
partnership in the firm unless the firm is registered and the person suing is
or has been shown in the register of firms as a partner in the firm.
Therefore, it can be safely concluded that Section 69(1) of the Partnership
Act prohibits a suit to be instituted to enforce a right arising from a
contract or conferred by the Partnership Act by or on behalf of any person
suing as a partner in a firm against the firm or any person alleged to have
been partners of the firm unless the firm is registered and the persons suing
are or have been shown in the register of firms as a partner in the firm. So
far as the present case is concerned, it is an admitted position that a
winding up petition was filed by an unregistered firm against a third party.
Therefore, in our view, Section 69(1) cannot be applied to the facts and
circumstances of this case as it is an admitted position that the petitioning
creditor being an unregistered partnership firm had not instituted a winding
up petition against the firm or any partner of the said firm but the same was
instituted against the company which is a third party. Therefore let us
consider whether Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act bars a winding up
petition to be instituted by an unregistered firm against a third party unless
the firm is registered and the persons suing are or have been shown in the
register of firms as partners in the firm. From a plain reading of Section
69(2) of the Partnership Act, it is clear to us that the object of Sub-section
(2) of Section 69 of the Partnership Act, is to make sure that the general
policy of the Legislature that all partnership firms should be registered. It
is also gathered from a close examination of the provisions under Section
69(2) of the Partnership Act that Section 69(2) clearly bars institution of a
suit to enforce a right arising from a contract by a firm against any third
party unless the firm is registered and the persons suing are or have been
shown in the register of firms as partners in the firm. So far as the
applicability of Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act is concerned in the
present case, we find that in this case admittedly an unregistered partnership
firm instituted the winding up petition against the third party viz., the
defendant/respondent. Therefore, the question now arises is whether in a
winding up petition, the cause of action for filing or instituting the winding
up petition would be for enforcement of a right arising from a contract. In
our view, in order to bring the winding up petition within the bar as
contemplated in Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act, two things are to be
considered. The first one is whether the winding up petition can be construed
to be a "suit" within the meaning of Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act and
the other is whether a winding up petition has been filed on a cause of action
to enforce a right arising from a contract or conferred by the Partnership
Act. So far as the first condition is concerned in this case, it is an
admitted position that petition for winding up filed by the unregistered firm
cannot be construed to be a "suit" within the meaning of Section 69(2) of the
Partnership Act, As we have already noted hereinearlier, Section 69(2) of the
Partnership Act refers to institution of a "suit". Therefore, there cannot be
any doubt that if the winding up petition is construed to be a "suit", in that
case a decree shall follow but it is an admitted position that no decree is
passed against an order passed by a learned company judge in a winding up
petition under Section 433 of the Companies Act. Therefore, there is no
question of treating the winding up proceeding as a suit as that question
cannot arise at all. Even assuming that the winding up petition can be treated
to be a suit, whether such a winding up petition could be instituted to
enforce a right arising from a contract or conferred by the Partnership Act.
Let us, therefore, consider whether in a winding up petition the unregistered
partnership firm is seeking enforcement of a right arising from a contract or
conferred by the Partnership Act. In our view, Section 69(2) of the
Partnership Act cannot stand in the way of an unregistered partnership firm to
make an application for winding up of the company because in our view such a
winding up petition was not filed to enforce a right arising from a contract.
It is now well settled that in a winding up petition, the court is only
required to decide whether the company is commercially solvent or insolvent.
Whatever right has been conferred on the court to wind up a company under the
Companies Act would only be exercised as a statutory right conferred under the
Companies Act. In our view in a winding up petition the lis is not merely
between the petitioning creditor and the company sought to be wound up. Once
the petition is admitted, creditors contributories, shareholders etc. seek
redress in the proceedings and even oppose the winding up of the company. The
company can be directed to be wound up by the court depending upon a case made
out whereupon the assets of the company had been taken over and distributed in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules. Therefore, in our
view, the proceedings under the Companies Act for winding up are entirely
different and a special remedy has been provided for in the Companies Act
which is a complete code by itself and the idea is not to restrict the
proceedings in respect of a winding up petition to the parties alone and its
power is widened and all steps taken in winding up proceedings are in public
interest. That being the position, in our view, this right cannot be construed
to be a right arising from a contract between the appellant and the company.
In the case of Kottamasu Sreemannarayanamurthy v. Chakka Arjanadu AIR 1939 Mad
145, a Division Bench of the Madras High Court observed that the creditor
which was an unregistered partnership firm was entitled to seek for
adjudication of a debtor as insolvent as such adjudication cannot be said to
seek for enforcement of a right arising from a contract and, therefore, such a
petition could be filed by an unregistered firm as a creditor. In a single
Bench decision of the Madras High Court in the case of Hind Mercantile
Corporation P. Ltd. v. J. H. Rayner and Co. Ltd. [1971] 41 Comp Cas 548, a
question arose whether filing of an application under Section 433(e) of the
Companies Act is a proceeding that would come under the arbitration clause. In
paragraph 13 of the said decision, Palaniswamy J., as His Lordship then was,
held that the winding up petition was not a matter which arose out of or under
the contract and no relief could be said to have been sought for in a winding
up petition as regards any matter that arose out of or under the contract. In
a very recent decision of the Supreme court in the case of Raptakos Brett and
Co. Ltd. v. Ganesh Property the Supreme Court dealt with this aspect of the
matter, though in that decision the Supreme Court was not considering a
petition for winding up by an unregistered partnership firm but in our view,
the principles laid down in the said decision for filing a suit for recovery
of possession based on a statutory right of the plaintiff could be squarely
applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case. In that decision the
plaintiff in the clearest terms had based its cause of action also on the law
of the land and also the cause of action emanating from the alleged breach of
the covenant on the part of the defendant. So far as the second part is
concerned that is to say cause of action emanating from the alleged breach of
the covenant on the part of the defendant, the Supreme Court held that no suit
for recovery of possession could be held to be maintainable in law in view of
the bar under Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act. But the Supreme Court in
that decision at the same time also laid down the principle that a suit filed
at the instance of an unregistered partnership firm which was based on a
statutory right under the provisions of Transfer of Property Act under which
the erstwhile tenant on the expiry of lease in respect of a premises was to
hand over vacant possession to his landlord was maintainable in law. According
to the Supreme Court, the said obligation on the part of the erstwhile tenant
is statutorily recognised by Section 108(q) read with Section 111(a) of the
Transfer of Property Act. The Supreme Court clearly opined in the said
decision that it is this statutory right of the lessor and the corresponding
statutory obligation of the lessee that could be said to have been relied upon
by the plaintiff for getting possession from the defendant as per the recitals
made in the plaint of that suit. In that decision the Supreme Court also
opined that the statutory obligation of the erstwhile tenant did not get
obliterated and repealed merely because such implied terms could be culled out
from the contract itself. The Supreme Court further opined in that decision
that such an implied obligation or term in the contract could not in any way
reduce the legal efficacy of the statutory obligation foisted upon such a
lessee by the express provisions of Section 108(q) read with Section 111(a) of
the Transfer of Property Act. On the basis of the aforesaid opinion the
Supreme Court finally concluded in that decision that non-compliance with the
statutory obligation by the defendant when made the subject matter of a
corresponding legal right of the erstwhile landlord cannot be said to be
giving rise to enforcement of any contractual right of the plaintiff arising
from the expired contract of tenancy. In paragraph 22, the Supreme Court made
the following observations and we reproduce the same as we find that would be
relevant for our purpose (pp. 206, 207 of [1998] 7 SCC) :

"22. The net effect of this discussion, therefore, is that the plaint as
framed by the plaintiff-respondent is based on a composite cause of action
consisting of two parts. One part refers to the breach of the covenant on the
part of the defendant when it failed to deliver vacant possession to the
plaintiff-lessor on the expiry of the lease after March 15, 1985, and
thereafter, all throughout, and thus it was guilty of breach of covenants 14
and 17 of the lease. The second part of the cause of action, however, is based
on the statutory obligation of the defendant-lessee when it failed to comply
with its statutory obligation under Section 108(q) read with Section 111(a) of
the Property Act. So far as this second part of the cause of action is
concerned, it cannot certainly be said that it is arising out of the erstwhile
contract,"

11\. Relying on and following the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in
the aforesaid decision viz., in the case of Raptakos Brett and Co. Ltd. , we
are of the view that in a winding up petition by an unregistered partnership
firm against the respondent who was a third party was not barred by Section
69(2) of the Partnership Act. In our view, the application for winding up
filed by an unregistered partnership firm was based on the statutory right
under Section 433 read with Section 439 of the Companies Act. In view of our
discussions made hereinearlier, and applying the principles laid down in the
aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court and other decisions as discussed
hereinabove, we are of the view that the enforcement of that right under the
Companies Act has nothing to do with the contract between the parties. The
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Raptakos Brett and Co. Ltd. was
again noticed by the apex court of our country in the case of Haldiram
Bhujiawala v. Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar, . In the said decision also the
Supreme Court held that the suit filed at the instance of an unregistered firm
for permanent injunction against the defendants from infringing their
trademark was not barred as institution of such a suit was not for enforcement
of a right arising from a contract entered into by unregistered firm with
third parties in the case of business transactions of the firm. In order to
interpret the words "arising from a contract" in Section 69(2) of the
Partnership Act, the Supreme Court in the aforesaid decision accepted the
principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Raptakos Brett and
Co. Ltd. . Such being the position and in view of the principles laid down by
the Supreme Court in the aforesaid two decisions and in view of our
discussions made hereinearlier that an obligation for winding up of a company,
cannot be said to have been on the basis of the terms and conditions of the
contract but must be said to have been based on a statutory right and not
"arising from a contract" as mentioned in Section 69(2) of the Partnership
Act, and in view of the fact that in a winding up petition the company court
shall only consider whether the company was commercially solvent or insolvent,
we are firmly of the opinion that the cause of action of a winding up petition
is not based on any fact which arises from a contract. At this stage we may
consider the decision of the single Bench of this court on which strong
reliance was placed by Mr. Basak, appearing on behalf of the respondent. This
is reported in Deb Paints P. Ltd. v. Universal Lime Industries [2002] 110 Comp
Cas 429 (Cal); [2002] 1 Cal LT 94. In view of our discussions made hereinabove
and in view of the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the decisions
discussed hereinearlier, we are unable to accept the views expressed by the
learned single judge made in the aforesaid decision. In the aforesaid decision
the learned judge after quoting Section 69 of the Partnership Act in paragraph
39 found that from the pleading of the winding up petition it would be evident
that the materials were sold and supplied by the petitioning creditor to the
company and bills were raised pursuant to such supply made on the order of the
company, and, therefore, the petitioning creditor was seeking to enforce a
right arising from a contract between the parties. The learned judge further
held that there was no reason to give a restricted meaning to the expression
"right arising from a contract" occurring under Section 69(3) of the Indian
Partnership Act. But the learned judge has also found that the remedy, which
is provided in the Companies Act for winding up of a company is a statutory
remedy, and such a remedy has been provided in public interest. According to
the learned judge, the right on the basis of which the said remedy was sought
for in that case was arising out of a contract entered into by the parties.
The learned judge further held that since the petitioning creditor was praying
for winding up of the company on its failure to pay the debt of the firm it
would be difficult to say that the petitioning creditor had not filed the
winding up proceeding to enforce its right arising from the contract. Although
the learned judge found that remedy for winding up may be statutory but the
right to get an order for winding up was based on a contract for supply of
goods and the winding up petition was filed for the alleged nonpayment of the
price of goods sold and delivered. So far as the decision of the Supreme Court
in the case of Raptakos Brett and Co. Ltd. was concerned, the learned judge
found that in the facts of that case the principles laid down in Raptakos
Brett and Co. Ltd. could not be applied as before the Supreme Court the suit
in question was partly barred inasmuch as part of the cause of action arose
from the contract. But in that decision, the entire cause of action in filing
the present winding up petition arose out of contractual transaction between
the parties. The learned judge in that decision has also held that a
partnership firm which is not registered is not an entity in the eye of law
and it is not a person and, therefore, held that at the instance of the
unregistered firm no petition for winding up can be said to be maintainable in
law. On the question whether the winding up petition is not maintainable in
law at the instance of an unregistered firm as an unregistered partnership
firm is not an entity in the eye of law, we are of the view that in view of
the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Raptakos Brett and Co. Ltd.
and also Haldiram Bhujiawala, , it cannot be said now that the suit filed by
an unregistered partnership firm is not at all maintainable in law in view of
the bar under Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act. In view of the aforesaid
two decisions, we do not find any reason to deliberate on this aspect of the
matter in detail. In Raptakos Brett and Co. Ltd. 's case the Supreme Court was
also considering a case where a suit was filed by an unregistered partnership
firm for recovery of possession. In that decision the Supreme Court clearly
held that a suit filed by an unregistered partnership firm is quite
maintainable in law. That being the position we are unable to agree with the
learned single judge saying that an unregistered firm is not an entity in the
eye of law. At the risk of repetition we may add that in the case of Raptakos
Brett and Co, Ltd. the Supreme Court in paragraph 23 of the said decision
clearly held that the second part of the cause of action was based on the
statutory obligation of the defendant-lessee when it failed to comply with its
statutory obligation under Section 108(q) read with Section 111(a) of the
Transfer of Property Act and, therefore, so far as this part of the cause of
action is concerned it cannot certainly be said that it was arising out of the
erstwhile contract. The Supreme Court in that decision also held that the
plaintiff which was an unregistered partnership firm was seeking enforcement
of its legal right to possession against the erstwhile lessee flowing from the
provisions of Section 108(q) read with Section 111(a) of the Transfer of
Property Act which in turn also sought to enforce the corresponding statutory
obligation of the defendant under the very same statutory provisions. Applying
this principle in the present case we are of the view that the appellant was
seeking enforcement of its legal right to get an order of winding up of a
company from the provisions of Section 433 of the Companies Act. In the case
of Haldiram Bhujiawala, of the said decision at page 1293 after discussing the
decision of the Supreme Court in Raptakos Brett and Co. Ltd.'s case and the
law on the point came to a conclusion of law that if a suit is based on
infringement of statutory rights under the Trade Marks Act, the said suit is
not for enforcement of any right arising out of a contract entered into by or
on behalf of the unregistered firm with third parties in the course of the
firm's business transactions and accordingly the suit was not barred under
Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act. In the present case the winding up
petition is based on the statutory right to ask for winding up of a company
under Section 433 of the Companies Act on the ground that the company is
commercially solvent or insolvent to pay its debts. Therefore, following the
aforesaid two decisions of the Supreme Court and in view of our discussions
made hereinearlier, we were therefore not in a position to accept the views
expressed in the decision of Deb Paints P. Ltd. 's case [2002] 110 Comp Cas
429; [2002] 1 Cal LT 94, Since we have come to a conclusion in the present
case that a winding up petition is not based to enforce a right arising from a
contract with the third parties, the other argument of Mr. Basak that in view
of Sub-section (3) of Section 69 of the Partnership Act the words used in the
said sub-section, namely, "other proceeding" would also be applicable in a
winding up petition, has only become academic. Accordingly, we are of the view
that the winding up petition is maintainable in law and, therefore, the
objection raised by Mr. Basak that no relief can be granted to the appellant
in the present winding up petition as the same was filed by an unregistered
firm, cannot be accepted.

12\. A short submission was also made by Mr. Basak by submitting that the
petition for winding up at the instance of the constituted attorney of the
petitioning creditor was not maintainable in law as the constituted attorney
represented the petitioning creditor without the permission of the court. In
support of this contention Mr. Basak relying on a Single Bench decision of the
Bombay High Court in the case of Shantilal Khushaldas and Bros. Pvt. Ltd.
[1993] 77 Comp Cas 253 submitted that the petition for winding up was not
maintainable at the instance of a constituted attorney of the petitioning
creditor without the leave of the court. From the order impugned we do not
find that such leave was not granted to the petitioning creditor but on the
other hand it is found that such leave was granted to the petitioning
creditor. Whether leave was granted or not by the learned company judge is
certainly a question of fact and such a finding cannot be disturbed in appeal.
As noted hereinearlier the learned company judge clearly held that leave was
granted to a constituted attorney to proceed with the application for winding
up. In any view of the matter we are unable to permit the respondent to raise
such question, as no appeal has been preferred by the respondent against the
impugned order by which the aforesaid findings were made by the learned
company judge. That apart the appeal has been preferred not by Mr. Basak's
client but by the petitioning creditor against the order refusing to grant
interest. Such being the position we are unable to permit the respondent to
raise this question at this stage.

13\. Let us now revert back to the question, which was argued on behalf of the
appellant on the merits of this appeal. According to Mr. Tiwari, appearing on
behalf of the appellant, the finding of the learned company judge that there
was no evidence that the interest was calculated at the agreed rate or that no
particulars in respect to computation of interest were produced either by
annexing the copy of the same or by producing the same before the learned
company judge, was not correct in the facts and circumstances of this case. It
is true that from the claim made in the winding up petition the petitioning
creditor was entitled to interest at 21 per cent. per annum after expiry of 80
days from the date of submission. The learned judge however did not grant
interest in the absence of any evidence to that extent. The only document that
was produced in support of such claim of interest was a statement annexed to
the winding up petition, which was unsigned, and without any authentication.
Such being the state of affairs before the learned company judge we do not
find any reason to hold otherwise as we find that the document annexed to the
winding up petition was not at all a signed and authenticated document and,
therefore, the learned company judge was fully justified in not relying on the
said document and thereby refused to grant interest.

14\. No other point was raised by learned counsel for the parties.

15\. For the reasons aforesaid, there is no merit in this appeal and we affirm
the impugned order of the learned company judge. Appeal is thus dismissed. In
view of the order passed by us today in the appeal, the application has become
infructuous. Accordingly the application is disposed of as infructuous.

16\. There will be no order as to costs.

Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J.

17\. I agree.

