

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi

Bechtel India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi vs Assessee on 14 October, 2015

    
    
    ITA No.882/D/2014
    Asstt.Year: 2009-10
    
                     IN THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                            DELHI BENCH `I' NEW DELHI
    
             BEFORE SHRI S.V. MEHROTRA, ACCOUNTANT MEMBER
                                   AND
               SHRI CHANDRA MOHAN GARG, JUDICIAL MEMBER
    
                               I.T.A.No.882/Del/2014
                              Assessment Year : 2009-10
    
    
    Bechtel India Pvt. Ltd.,        vs          DCIT,
    418, Naurang House,                          Circle-2(1),
    21, K.G. Marg,                               New Delhi.
    New Delhi.
    (PAN: AAACB0298A)
     (Appellant)                         (Respondent)
                 Appellant by: S/Shri S.D. Kalipa, R.R.Maurya, Praveen Sharma,
                 Sanjay Kumar, Advocates
            Respondent by : S/Shri Ravi Jain, CIT DR, Subhakant Sahoo, Sr. DR
                                   Date of last hearing: 12.10.2015
                               Date of pronouncement: 14.10.2015
                                   ORDER
    

PER CHANDRAMOHAN GARG, J.M.

This appeal by the assessee has been preferred against the order of DCIT,
Circle 2(1), New Delhi dated 6.1.2014 passed u/s 143(3) r/w section 144C of
the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short the Act) in pursuance to the directions of
the Dispute Resolution Panel-I (DRP), New Delhi dated 26.11.2013 u/s 144C(5)
of the Act for AY 2009-10.

2\. In the beginning of the argument, ld. Counsel appearing for the assessee
submitted that the assessee does not want to press ground no. 1, 2, 3.6, 3.7,
3.8  1 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 and 4, therefore, we dismiss the
same as not pressed. Remaining grounds for adjudication read as under:-

> "3. That on facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO/Ld.
> TPO/Ld. Dispute Resolution Panel ("DRP") erred in making an addition of Rs.
> 57,46,70,024/- to the returned income of the Appellant by re-computing the
> arm's length price of the international transactions under section 92 of the
> Act. Thus, in passing the order, the Ld. AO/Ld. TPO/Ld. DRP erred in:

> 3.1 Rejecting the comparable companies set adopted by the Appellant in its
> transfer pricing documentation on the basis of additional/modified
> quantitative filters which lacked valid and sufficient reasoning.

> 3.2 Ignoring the comparable set proposed by Appellant as a result of fresh
> benchmarking study without assigning any reasoning.

> 3.3 Accepting companies which were functionally not comparable to the
> Appellant in terms of Functions, Assets and Risk profile.

> 3.4 Including companies with high/supernormal margins in the comparable set
> adopted.

> 3.5. Including government held enterprises in the final comparable set
> adopted.

> 3.6 Not providing the benefit of economic adjustment on account of
> difference in working capital profile and thus not following the binding
> directions of Hon'ble DRP.

> 3.7 Denied the benefit of economic adjustments on account of difference in
> risk profile in arriving at the arm's length mean margin.

> 3.8 Considered reimbursements as part of the operating cost and recomputed
> the profit margin of the Appellant. Further, the Ld. TPO did not follow a
> consistent approach by not considering reimbursement received as part of
> operating revenue on the same principle. Further, the Ld. DRP has not given
> its directions against the specific plea raised by the Appellant on the said
> issue.

> 5\. That in the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld. AO
> erred in disallowing the loss of INR 21,80,46,325/- incurred by the assessee
> on re-measuring the foreign exchange forward contract i.e. 'Mark to Market
> Losses' as on balance sheet date.

2

ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 5.1 That the Ld. AO erred in holding
that the Mark to Market losses in respect of re-measuring the foreign exchange
forward contract as on balance sheet date are notional and contingent in
nature.

5.2 That the Ld. AO erred in placing reliance on Instruction No. 3/2010 dated
23 March 2010 issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes, as this instruction
is issued with respect to assessees trading in forex-derivatives. Also, the
instruction is issued after the year under consideration. Thus, accordingly
the same is not applicable to the assessee. Further, the said this Instruction
is ultra vires to the scope of section 119 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 being
prejudicial to the interest of the assessee.

5.3 That the Ld. AO erred in holding that Mark to Market losses in respect of
re-measuring the foreign exchange forward contract as on balance sheet date is
not allowable as the forward contracts have not been taken for the purpose of
business on raising of export invoice but taken without due exposure.

5.4 That the Ld. AO erred in disregarding the order passed by the Hon'ble
Delhi Bench of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal in the Appellant's own case
for the assessment year 2008-09 reported as Bechtel India (P.) Ltd. vs. ACIT
[2013] 33 taxmann.com 213 wherein the mark to market losses in respect of
foreign exchange forward contracts as on the balance sheet date was allowed to
the Appellant.

6\. That the Ld. AO has erred in charging interest under section 234B, 2340
and 244A of the Act amounting to INR 13,40,39,006.

7\. That on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the Ld.
AO has erred in initiating penalty proceedings under section 271(1)(c) of the
Act."

Ground no. 3 to 3.5 of the assessee

3\. Apropos these grounds, we have heard arguments of both the sides and
carefully perused the relevant material placed on record.

4\. Ld. Counsel of the assessee submitted that the ld. DRP and the AO erred in
making an addition of Rs. 57,46,70,024 to the returned income of the  3 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 assessee by recomputing ALP of the
international transaction u/s 92 of the Act. Ld. Counsel further contended
that the TPO was not justified in rejecting the comparable companies set
adopted by the Appellant in its transfer pricing documentation on the basis of
additional/modified quantitative filters which lacked valid and sufficient
reasoning. Ld. Counsel further contended that the TPO was not correct in
ignoring the comparable set proposed by Appellant as a result of fresh
benchmarking study without assigning any reasoning and accepting companies
which were functionally not comparable to the Appellant in terms of Functions,
Assets and Risk profile. Ld. counsel vehemently contended that TPO/DRP and the
AO were incorrect on facts and in law in including companies with
high/supernormal margins in the comparable set adopted for benchmarking
impugned transaction of the assessee and in including government held
enterprise in the final comparable set adopted for benchmarking international
transaction of the assessee and for making impugned said addition to the
returned income of the assessee by recomputing the ALP of the alleged
international transaction u/s 92 of the Act.

5\. Ld. Counsel further elaborated the background and factum of the case and
submitted that the assessee company is a captive service provider, providing
engineering design and related services to its Associated Enterprises (AEs) to
support the overseas office's turnkey project execution. Referring to Paper
Book pages 382-481, ld. Counsel submitted that as per brief overview of the
academic analysis conducted in the TP study, a provision of engineering design
4 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 related service revenue was Rs.43.46
crore and by applying Transactional Net Margin Method (TNMM), the appellant's
PLI was 12.57% by taking OP/OR as PLI after undertaking adjustment for ideal
capacity and foreign exchange fluctuation and after considering the margin of
comparable in TP study i.e. - 4.49%, the final adjustment was captured as
Rs.6,22,45,957/-, whereby the TPO proposed margin of 32.47% without providing
adjustment towards working capital, risk and ideal capacity. Ld. Counsel
further pointed out that after ld. DRP ruling, the margin after providing
working capital adjustment was 15.34% wherein risk and ideal capacity
adjustment was not provided by DRP/TPO for making impugned addition.

6\. Ld. Counsel of the assessee reiterating its written submissions dated
17.6.2015 spread over 7 pages submitted that in the Transfer Pricing study,
the assessee selected 7 comparables while the TPO accepted that the assessee
is in the business of providing engineering support services and accepted TNMM
as MAM and OP/TC as PLI the assessee as a tested party. Ld counsel submitted
that the assessee mainly disputes selection of Certification Engineers
International Ltd. (CEIL) and NTPC Electrical Supply CO. Ltd. (NTPCES) without
any basis and the DRP has considered the issue of Related Party Transaction
(RPT) even though specific objections were raised by the assessee. Ld. counsel
further pointed out that the TPO applied this filter mechanically by taking
into account monetary transaction between the holding company and CEIL by
ignoring various non-monetary benefits like free or level-basis of  5 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 office facilities and secondments of
employees by the holding company. Ld. Counsel contended that in the case of
NTPCES, ld. DRP failed to note that this company does not even discuss RPT in
its relevant annual report and it is pertinent to note that Schedule 9 of
annual report clearly states that the amount payable to NTPC under the head
current liability as on 31.3.2009 was Rs.12.87 crores which alone is 18% of
its operating revenue.

7\. Ld. Counsel further pointed out that while evaluating comparables of these
two impugned companies, the DRP has ignored the material difference in
functional, geographical location of party and related party transaction (RPT)
and the sole criteria adopted by the ld. DRP for treating NTPCES and CEIL as
suitable comparables is only with Bechtel India Private Ltd. These two
companies employ high-end technological and engineering resources and
personnel. Ld. Counsel vehemently contended that the DRP erred in analyzing
the function of these entities in terms of resources employed and failed to
consider the wide variation in skills and qualification of employees. In the
light of broad functional profile of these companies which cannot be held as
comparable for benchmarking international transaction of the present assessee
company for the year under consideration, ld. Counsel pointed out that if
these companies viz. CEIL and NTPCES are deleted from the final set of
comparables, then the international transaction of the assessee would fall
within the ambit of zero adjustment and, therefore, the same may kindly be
deleted from the final set of comparables adopted by the ld. TPO/DRP and AO.
Ld.  6 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 counsel in the written
submissions submitted a table highlighting the difference between the assessee
company and the impugned comparable i.e. NTPCES and CEIL which is being
reproduced below for the sake of clarity and transparency in our findings:-

    
    
    Sr.                   Bechtel India           NTPCES                                 CEIL
    No.                                         Pg. 810/Vol.IV                     Pg. 765/Vol.-IV
    1.     Operating      Rs. 178.36 Cr.        Rs.71.72 Cr.                   Rs. 24.75 Cr.
           Revenue
    2.     Status         Private          Government company 100%             Government Company. Till
                          company-         subsidiary of National Thermal      1994, it was a division of
                          incorporated     Power Corporation (NTPC),           Engineers India Ltd. (EIL), (
                          in 1994 as       which is a Government               a government company)
                          100%             company.                            from     which    it    was
                          subsidiary of                                        demerged as a 100%
                          Bechtel                                              subsidiary company.
                          Corporation,
                          USA.
    3.     Function                        As per website NTPC. Com:
                                           The company was formed on
                                           August 21, 2002. It is a wholly
                          Rendering        owned subsidiary company of
                          Engineering a    NTPC with the objective of          Third Party Inspection
                          support          making a foray into the             (TPI), & Certification olf
                          service          business of distribution and        equipment supplied by
                          including        supply of electrical power, as a    vendors and fabrication or
                          related          sequel to reforms initiated in      installation  work       of
                          design and       the power sector.            The    Contractors of       ONGC
                          drawings as      company was also mandated           under a MOU between EIL
                          per              to take up consultancy and          & ONGC dt. 11/4/1985 on
                          specifications   other assignments in the area       nomination basis. (Ref. Pg.
                          of     foreign   of     Electrical    Distribution   765-773, 803-805/Vol.-IV).
                          AEs.             Management System. (Copy of         Terms of MOU are not
                                           screenshot at Annexure 1A)          known. Also carries on
                                           As per Schedule 17 of AR (pg.       similar TPI & Certification
                                           843 of Vol.-IV/AR) The              work independently for
                                           company is operating in a           other PSUs.
                                           single segment, that is,
                                           providing consultancy, project
                                           management and supervision
                                           services."
                                           Extracts from AR:
                                           It executes turnkey contracts
                                           for XIth Plan electricity supply
                                           projects entrusted/awarded to
    
                                                     7
     ITA No.882/D/2014
    Asstt.Year: 2009-10
    
                                       it by government companies
                                       and Departments. Has JV for
                                       retain distribution of power in
                                       Kerala.
                                       It is "Entrusted the work of
                                       rural electrification of 4107
                                       villages" Pan India Rural
                                       electrification under Rajiv
                                       Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikarna
                                       Yojana        (RGGVY)-Achieved
                                       electrification of 4107villages
                                       execution of Turn Key Projects,
                                       providing        third      party
                                       inspection services. JV for
                                       retail distribution of power &
                                       Project             Management
                                       Consultancy to Discoms and
                                       Power generating companies.
                                       Its functional profile is similar
                                       to Bechtel USA, holding
                                       company (Pg.1/DRP order).
                                       The           contracts/projects
                                       'entrusted' (Pg. 811/Vol.- IV).
                                       (Ref. Pg. 810-812, 835-838,
                                       843/Vol.-IV.)
    4.     Geographical International- Domestic customers-Nil export Domestic             customers-
           Market        100%                                            Insignificant export of
                         exporter of                                     service.
                         service.
    5.     Forex         Yes           Nil                               Insignificant Forex earning
           Fluctuation                                                   3.75%       of     operating
           Risk                                                          revenue. (Schd. 3(3) at pg.
                                                                         803/Vol.-IV
    6.     RPT (DRP has 100%           1)RPT not reported in A.R
           failed     to               Transactions      mainly     with 1)RPT declared are only
           consider                    related       parties     (other monetary         transactions
           objection)                  Government Company/Govt. with Holding Co. only
                                       Departments)                      (19.60%) Transactions with
    

Schd. 9 of A.R current Liability other AEs like ONGC, IOCL

i)"Amount payable to NTPC etc. not quantified, (Pg.

    
    
                                       Ltd. Rs. 12.87 crores (Pg. 215/Vol-II/DRP
                                       835/IV.)                          submission)
                                       ii) Schd. 17, Notes on
                                       Accounts:                         SCHEDULE J
                                       "5) All the employees of the
                                       company are on secondment (Notes on accounts)
                                       from the Holding Company,
                                                                         "5) The jobs awarded by
                                       "9) The common services
                                                                         ONGC on nomination
                                       being utilized by the Company
                                                                         basis are being governed
                                       for it's office at NOIDA are
                                                                         by the MOU signed
                                       provided without any charges
                                                                         between EIL & ONGC
    
                                                   8
     ITA No.882/D/2014
    Asstt.Year: 2009-10
    
                                    by the Holding Company. "(Pg.      dated 11/4/1985.
                                    844/Vol-IV)
                                    All employees on secondment        6) The company has a
                                    from NTPC at cost.                 Memorandum               of
                                    Benefits received from Holding     Understanding          with
                                    company not monetised in the       Engineers India Ltd. (The
                                    A.R.                               Holding Company) for
                                    Revenues        are       from     providing         manpower
                                    Government          companies/     services, office space and
                                    Departments, which must be         facilities etc. The MOU
                                    considered as related parties.     provides level basesd fixed
                                    Reliance placed on ITAT order      man hour/man-day rates
                                    in Thyseen Krupp Pg. 678 at        for       EIL    employees,
                                    694/Vol-III.             Note:     inclusive of overheads and
                                    Contracts/projects for rural       fixed annual cost towards
                                    electrification schemes        '   space, infrastructure and
                                    entrustesd'/ sanctioned to         facilities etc. provided by
                                    NTPCES under Rajiv Gandhi          EIL.
                                    Vidyutidaran Yojana are not
                                    awarded under open tender          The company also has a
                                    as per CVC Circular dt.            Memorandum               of
                                    3/3/2007.                          Understanding          with
                                                                       Engineers India Limited for
                                                                       providing       manpower
                                                                       services to EIL at actual
                                                                       cost plus 10% margin."
    
                                                                       CEO's salary paid by EIL.
    
                                                                       Ref. (804/Vol-IV)
    
                                                                       Note: Contracts awarded
                                                                       to CEIL by ONGC on
                                                                       'nomination basis' under
                                                                       MOU with EIL are not
                                                                       entered into open tender
                                                                       as per CVC Circular dated
                                                                       3/3/2007.
    
    
    
    
    

8\. First of all, we find it appropriate to consider the comparability of
NTPCES and CEIL with the assessee company i.e. Bechtel India Pvt. Ltd. As per
aforesaid contention of the assessee, both these companies are not a suitable
comparable for benchmarking international transaction of the assessee Bechtel
9 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 India Pvt. Ltd., therefore, the AO/TPO
may be directed to delete the same from the final set of comparables. Ld.
Counsel also pointed out that after deletion of these impugned comparables,
the international transaction of the assessee company would fall within 5% + -
limit and there would be no requirement of making any transfer pricing
adjustment to the returned income of the assessee.

9\. Replying to the above, ld. DR contended that for AY 2009-10, the TPO/AO
rightly held that impugned two companies are suitable comparable for
benchmarking international transaction of the assessee company as functional
profile of these companies are similar to the assessee company and mere
pointing out some micro differences do not lose the title of comparability
with the assessee company. Ld. AR also contended that the assessee company
rendering engineering design, project support including design as per
specification of foreign AE and impugned two companies NTPCES and CEIL are
also rendering services in the similar field, therefore their suitability and
comparability cannot be challenged on the frivolous and petty grounds.
Adjudication of comparability of NTPCES with the assessee company

10\. On careful consideration of above submissions of both the sides, we find
it appropriate to consider the issue of comparability of NTPCES and CEIL one
by one with the assessee company Bechtel India Pvt. Ltd. Ld. Counsel
reiterating its written submissions and comparability table therein submitted
that the assessee company is a private company incorporated in 1994 as 100%
subsidiary of Bechtel Corp USA. Elaborating the functional profile of the  10
ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 assessee company, ld. Counsel submitted
that the main function of the assessee company is rendering engineering
support services by way of preparing and supplying designs and drawings as per
the specifications of the foreign AEs i.e. Bechtel Corporation USA. Ld.
Counsel further pointed out that the assessee company is securing operating
revenue of Rs.178.36 crore from its 100% export of services to its AE having
forex fluctuation risk and 100% related party transactions (RPT) and DRP has
failed to consider these important factual aspects while rejecting the
objections of the assessee company to the comparability of NTPCES.

11\. Ld. Counsel further pointed out that NTPCES is a 100% government owned
company subsidiary to the National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC). Ld.
Counsel further pointed out that NTPCES was formed on 21.8.2002 is wholly
owned subsidiary of NTPC with the objective of making a foray into the
business of distribution and supply of electric power as a sequel to reforms
initiated in the power sector. Ld. Counsel also submitted that NTPCES was also
mandated to take up consultancy and other assignments in the area of electric
distribution management system and the company is also operating in a single
segment of providing consultancy, project management and supervision services.

12\. Ld. Counsel further pointed out that NTPCES executed turnkey contracts
for XIth Plan electricity supply projects entrusted/awarded to it by
government companies and departments under joint venture for retaining
distribution of  11 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 power in Kerala. Ld.
counsel further pointed out that this company was also entrusted the work of
rural electrification of 4107 villages under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidutikarana
Yojana (RGGVY) for achieving electrification of these villages and execution
of Turn Key Projects providing third party inspection service. Ld. Counsel
also pointed out as per page observations in the DRP order, NTPCES also got
joint venture assignment for retail distribution of power management
consultancy to DISCOMs and power generating company. Ld. counsel also pointed
out that NTPCES has all domestic customers specially government companies and
department having no export services and the same cannot be held as comparable
with the assessee company having 100% export of services outside India to its
AE only.

13\. Ld. Counsel also pointed out that the assessee company is having 100% RPT
with its AE whereas RPT of NTPCES has not been reported in the annual report
and this company has undertaken transaction mainly with the related parties
such as government companies and government departments. Ld. Counsel also
pointed out that as per annual report of the NTPCES during the financial
period under consideration the amount of Rs.12.87 crore was payable to the
NTPC Ltd. and as per notes on account, all the employees of NTPCES are on
settlement from the holding company and the NTPCES was utilising common
services for its office at Noida provided without any charges by the holding
company. Ld. Counsel vehemently contended that all the employees of NTPCES are
on secondment from the holding company at cost and benefits  12 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 received from holding NTPCES are not
monetised in the annual report. Placing reliance on the judgment of ITAT in
the case of Thyseen Krupps India (Pvt.) Ltd. vs ACIT (2013) 33 Taxman.com 107
(Mumbai Tribunal). Ld. Counsel submitted that when a comparable has two
segments and its revenue from comparable segment is complete in itself and is
not influenced by inter-segment revenue, comparability in such a case has to
be examined at segmental level and not entity level. Ld. counsel also pointed
out para 12.8.1 and 12.8.2 of the order of the ITAT in the case of Thyseen
Krupps (supra) and submitted that if related party transactions are much more,
then the filter of 25%, is not a suitable comparable and therefore, the order
for the exclusion of the same would be appropriate.

14\. Ld. counsel of the assessee pointed out that TPO was not correct in
applying the filters by taking companies whose income is less than Rs.5 crore
as the analysis would not lead to a proper comparability and moreover their
low cost/sales base makes their result unreliable. Ld. counsel also pointed
out that companies whose revenue from engineering support services is less
than 75% of the total operative revenue should be excluded. The ld. Counsel
also pointed out that the ld. DRP in its order dated 16.12.2014 for AY 2005-06
has concluded that NTPCES is not functionally comparable with the assessee
Bechtel India. He took us through operative para at pages 5-6 of the DRP order
(supra).

13 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

15\. Replying to the above, ld. DR pointed out that business profile of the
assessee company as taxpayer recorded by the DRP in para 3 page 2 of the DRP
order and submitted that the assessee company has less complex o NTPCES and
CEIL operations and was accordingly selected as a tested party for the TP
analysis. Ld. DR supporting the observations of the DRP submitted that NTPCES
is into services requiring high end technology and engineering advances,
therefore, this company is functionally quite similar to the assessee
Bechtell. Ld. DR also pointed out that as per annual report of the NTPCES the
assessee company also has similar functional profile, therefore, the DRP was
right in upholding the conclusion of the TPO in this regard wherein NTPCES was
included in the final set of comparables.

16\. On careful consideration of above submissions of both the sides, we note
that the business and functional profile of assessee company as tax payer, as
noted by the DRP reads as under:-

> "Business Profile of Bechtel India as per taxpayer:

> • Bechtel Corporation, USA ('hereinafter referred to as Bechtel USA') set up
> a subsidiary company in India viz BIPL in April 1994 to render engineering
> support service in respect of engineering designs and drawings, BIPL
> executes engineering designs and drawings for various overseas group
> entities to support the overseas offices' turnkey project execution.

Presently, BIPL undertakes engineering design and related services for its
overseas group companies. ' • The development of the Arm's length Price
('ALP') by the taxpayer recognizes that BIPL performs contract engineering
design services for its group companies. BIPL leverages on all the valuable
intellectual Property ('IP') Right  14 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10
('IPRs') [know-how, copyrights, etc] and other commercial processes,
methodologies, etc. belonging to its AEs. Further, the Group is involved in
complex operations of marketing, bidding for projects, providing turnkey
solutions, project management and adhering to delivery timelines. BIPL
provides engineering design services exclusively to its overseas AEs. Based on
above, BIPL has less complex operations, bears lesser share of risks and was
accordingly selected as the tested party for the analysis ."

In view of rival submissions of both the sides, at the very outset, we note
that the assessee Betchell India (BIPL) is a private company incorporated in
India in April 1994 as Bechtell Corporation, USA. Admittedly and undisputedly,
as per business and functional profile of the assessee company, the assessee
company is rendering support services of engineering design and drawing,
execution of engineering designs and drawing for various overseas group
entities to support the overseas offices in turnkey project execution. The
assessee company also undertakes engineering design and relates services for
its overseas group companies. From the aforesaid business and functional
profile it is amply clear that the assessee company performs contract
engineering design services for its group companies. BIPL leverages on all the
valuable intellectual Property ('IP') Right ('IPRs') and other commercial
processes, methodologies, etc. belonging to its AE i.e. Bechtell Corporation
USA. The DRP has also recorded that the entire Group is involved in complex
operations of marketing, bidding for projects, providing turnkey solutions,
project management and adhering to delivery timelines. The assessee company
only provides engineering design services exclusively to its overseas AEs and
the assessee has less complex operations, bears lesser share of risk.

Ld. DR has not disputed and could not demolish this fact that as per website
of NTPC.com the NTPCES is a wholly owned subsidiary company of NTPC with the
objective of making a foray into the business distribution and supply of
electrical power as a sequel to reform initiated in the power sector. We
further note that undisputedly NTPCES was also mandated to take up consultancy
and other assignments in the area of electrical distribution management
system. From page 843 of volume 4 of assessee's paper book, NTPCES is
operating in a  15 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 single segment i.e.
providing consultancy, project management and supervision services.

However, ld. DR has pointed out that except micro dissimilarities the main
business and functional profile of the assessee company is quite similar to
NTPCES but he could not demolish this factum that the NTPCES executed turnkey
contracts for 11th plan electricity supply projects awarded to it by the
Government companies and electrical departments which also includes activity
of distribution of power in Kerala. Undisputedly, the NTPCES was also provided
work contract of rural electrification of 4107 villages, execution of turnkey
projects and also provided third party inspection services. While the NTPCES
is also rendering services for retail distribution of power and management
consultancy to DISCOMs and other power generating companies, then its
functionality with the asessee company cannot be held as comparable. We are
also not in agreement with the conclusion of the DRP/TPO that the functional
profile of NTPCES is similar to Bechtell Corporation USA i.e. holding company
because we have to compare comparability of assesee company and not its
holding company.

Turning to the issue of geographical markets of both the companies,
undisputedly assessee company having international transactions only with AE
exporting 100% services to Bechtell Corporation USA whereas the NTPCES has nil
exports having 100% domestic customers who are government companies and
departments. We cannot also ignore this fact that the assessee Bechtell has
100% related party transaction with its AE and RPT have not been reported in
the annual report of the NTPCES. It cannot be ignored that the contracts
purchased for rural electrification schemes essential to NTPCES under Rajiv
Gandhi Grameen Vidutikarana Yojana (RGGVY) were not awarded under open tender
as per CVC Circular dated 3.3.2007 and on specific query from the Bench. Ld.
DR could not point out any fact demolishing this factum.

When we consider the ratio laid down by ITAT Mumbai in the case of
Thyssenkrupp India (P) Ltd. vs ACIT (Mumbai) we note that the ITAT Mumbai has
categorically held that when the related party transactions are much more than
the filter of 25%,  16 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 then the same
should be excluded. The relevant observations of the Tribunal at page 694 read
as under:-

"12.8.1 Next is the case of Engineers India Limited, which was included by the
TPO at his own. The learned Counsel for the assessee contended that this case
should be ignored because it is a Government Undertaking. It was further
pointed out that most of its customers of the 'Turnkey project division' are
related parties, being, other Public Sector Undertakings, which is much more
than the filter of 25%. The learned Departmental Representative, however,
accentuated that the TPO was right in including this case in the list of
comparables.

12.8.2 We find it as undisputed that Engineers India Limited is a Government
company. It has several segments which also include Turnkey project'. Page 700
of the paper book is a copy of annual report of Engineers India Limited on
turnkey project. It can be seen that the revenue has arisen from completing
Paraxylene Plant of IOCL and further that company is engaged in execution of
other unit of IOCL's Panipat Naphtha Cracker Project. In our considered
opinion, this case should not have been included in the list of final
comparables for two reasons. First reason is that profit motive is not a
relevant consideration in case of Government undertakings. Many Government
Undertakings even operate on losses in furtherance of the social obligations
of the government. The second reason is that Engineers India Limited earned
income from turnkey project by successfully completing the project of IOCL and
other Public Sector Undertakings. In that sense of the matter, the related
party transactions are much more than the filter of 25%. We, therefore, order
for the exclusion of this case from the list of comparables."

17\. In view of proposition laid down by the ITAT, Mumbai, we observe that in
that case, Engineers India Ltd. earned income from turnkey projects by  17 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 successfully completing the project of IOCL
and other public sector undertaking and the related party transaction were
much more than the filter of 25%, therefore, the order for exclusion of
Engineers India Ltd. was passed by the Tribunal. In the present case, the
NTPCES was sheltered by its holding company NTPCES and government companies
and departments awarded/entrusted various projects/contracts for rural
electrification, distribution of power and project management consultancy,
therefore, NTPCES loses the tag of comparability with the assessee Bechtell
India. We also find it appropriate to mention that it cannot be ignored that
the NTPCES is also enjoying settlement of all employees from the holding
company NTPCS at cost and the benefits received from the holding company and
related party transactions (RPT) are not monetised in the annual report and in
absence of specific data in this regard, NTPCES cannot be held as comparable
with the assessee company. Therefore, AO/TPO was not justified in including
NTPCES in the final set of comparables for benchmarking impugned international
transaction of the assessee company and they are directed to delete the same.
We order accordingly.

Adjudication of comparability of CIEL with the assessee company

18\. Ld. counsel of the assessee company reiterated the functionality of the
assessee company Bechtell India submitted that the CIEL is not functionally
similar to the assessee company due to its special features and monopoly based
contract awarding privileges granted by ONGC and other government  18 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 companies. Ld. Counsel strongly contended
that the CIEL is a government company and it was a division of Engineers India
Ltd. till 1994 from which it was demerged as a 100% subsidiary company of
Engineers India Ltd. (EIL). Ld. Counsel pointed out that CIEL undertakes third
party inspection and certification of equipment supplied by the vendors and
fabrication and installation work of contracts of ONGC under MOU between EIL
and ONGC dated 11.4.1985 on nomination basis. Referring to page 365 to 773 and
803 to 805 Volume IV of assessee's paper book submitted that the terms of said
MOU are not known and open to the public domain and hence it can be safely
inferred that the CIEL is enjoying the benefits of awarding of contact work on
nomination basis without any open tender from its holding company EIL and
other government companies. Ld. Counsel also pointed out that the CIEL also
carries on similar Third party inspection (TPI) and certification work
independently for other public sector undertaking and it cannot be compared
with assessee Bechtell India who is rendering only engineering support
services including related drawing and design, as per specification of foreign
AE. Ld. Counsel vehemently contended that the assessee Bechtell India is
providing primary engineering support services along with design and drawings
as per specification of the foreign associated enterprise which clearly
denotes primary and preparatory work for intuition of execution of work
contract whereas the CIEL provides services of third party inspection (TPI)
and certification of equipment supplied by the vendors and fabrication and
installation of work  19 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 contracts of
ONGC which is a service rendered after commissioning and installation of
project.

19\. Ld. Counsel also pointed out that CIEL provides aforesaid services to its
domestic government companies and PSU having insignificant export of services
whereas the assessee Bechtell India is exporter of 100% services to its AE.
Ld. Counsel also pointed out that the assessee Bechtell India receives its
remuneration/revenues from its AE in foreign exchange having forex fluctuation
risk whereas the CIEL having insignificant forex earning of 3.75% of operating
revenue as per Schedule III at page 803 of Volume IV of paper book of the
assessee. Ld. Counsel vehemently contended that the related party transaction
(RTP) are 100% in the case of asessee Bechtell India whereas the RTP of CIEL
are only monetary transaction with the holding company having 19.60%
transaction with ONGC, IOCL etc. which are not quantified. Ld. Counsel also
pointed out that the jobs awarded by ONGC on nomination basis are being
governed by the MOU or by holding company dated 11.4.1985.

20\. Ld. Counsel also pointed out that contracts being awarded to CIEL for
rural electrification schemes sanctioned to NTPCES are not awarded under open
tender as per CVC Circular dated 3.3.2007 and hence, this company having
privilege of awarding contracts and job on nomination basis without any open
tender cannot be held as functionally comparable with the assessee company.

21\. Replying to the above, ld. CIT DR submitted that apart from engineering
design, project support and procurement services also has objects like project
20 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 monitoring and control and
construction services. Thus, functionally it is no different from
Certification Engineers International Ltd. (CEIL). Ld. DR also pointed out
that unlike the 1980s, government companies now carry on business in an
environment of open competition and therefore price paid by one PSU or
government company to another for goods or services represents Arms's Length
Price (ALP). Ld. CIT DR contended that in this situation of open market
environment, MOU between EIL and ONGC referred to in the annual report of CIEL
for FY 2008-09 pertaining to AY 2009-10 has no relevance.

22\. Ld. CIT DR also submitted that the TPO rightly observed that since a
person holding voting shares of 26% in a company is considered to be its AE
u/s 92A(2)(b), therefore, RPT filter of 25% of total revenue is justified,
therefore, RPT filter of 25% without recognizing non-monetized benefits
flowing from holding company to CEIL/NTPCES has been correctly applied. Ld.
CIT DR strongly contended that the transactions between two government
companies or public sector undertakings should not be considered to be related
party transactions because shares in government companies are held by the
President of India merely in the name and no effective control is exercised by
him. Ld. CIT DR lastly submitted that no adverse inference needs to be drawn
from non-disclosure of transactions between two state-controlled enterprises
as no such requirement is prescribed in AS-18. Ld. DR finally submitted the
action of the AO/TPO by inclusion of CIEEL in the final set of comparables for
benchmarking of impugned international transactions of the assessee company.
21 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

23\. Ld. Counsel of the assessee also placed rejoinder to the aforesaid
submissions and contentions of the ld. CIT DR and submitted that the ld. DRP
has duly noted the business functions of the assessee and have reproduced the
same at page 2 of its order u/s 144C (5) of the Act. Ld. Counsel of the
assessee vehemently contended that the ld. DRP agrees that the conclusion of
the ld. TPO that the assessee Bechtel India is primarily engaged in rendering
engineering support services by way of procuring and supplying design and
drawings as per specifications of the AE by using the IPR supplied by the AE
Bechtel Corporation USA. Ld. Counsel further pointed out that it is for this
reason that the DRP upheld the two filters applied by the AO for the purpose
of selecting comparables viz. (i) companies having revenue of less than Rs. 5
crore from rendering support services and; (ii) revenue from engineering
support services is less than 75% of total operating revenue. Ld. Counsel also
canvassed another submission that the ld. TPO/DRP have applied aforesaid two
filters for selecting comparables because they accept that the primary
business of the assessee company is of procuring design and drawings for AE
enabling them to execute engineering products for clients outside India. Ld.
Counsel contended that the ld. TPO/DRP have wrongly rejected the assessee's
objection regarding inclusion of CIEL on altogether different basis i.e. the
issue regarding functional non-comparables; is also not acceptable that in the
cases of TNMM analysis one examines the comparables at a very broad level
unlike CUP analysis where exact similarity is required. Ld. Counsel has also
drawn our  22 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 attention towards relevant
part of the DRP order available at page 48 of the assesse's paper book wherein
sole criterion adopted by the DRP for treating NTPCES and CIEL s comparable to
the assessee is that like Bechtel India, these two companies employ high-end
technology and handling sources and personnel.

24\. Ld. Counsel finally pointed out that CIEL is not functionally comparable
with the assessee Bechtel India not only due to aforesaid reasons but related
party transaction declared by CIEL withholding company are only 19.60% and
transaction with other AE/government companies and departments like ONGC, IOCL
etc. are not quantified. To support this contention he has drawn our attention
towards assessee's paper book Volume II page 215 the submission of the
assessee before DRP. Ld. Counsel parted with the argument that the AO/DRP/TPO
should be directed to delete CIEL from the final set of comparables which is
clearly functionally different with the assessee company.

25\. On careful consideration of above rival submissions of both the sides, t
the very outset, let us deal with the issue of related party transactions
(RPT). Ld. DR relying on the TPO's observations submitted that since the
person holding voting shares of 26% in a company is considered to be its AE
u/s 92A(2)(b) of the Act, thereafter RPT filter of >25% of total revenue is
justified. Ld. DR further pointed out that RPT filter of 25% without
recognising non- monetized benefits flowing from the holding company
CIEL/NTPCES has been correctly applied. Ld. DR has also contended and
reiterated that the transaction  23 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10
between two government companies should not be considered to be RPT because
shares in government companies are hold by the President of India merely in
his name and there is no effective control exercised by him and they cannot be
treated as related parties. To support this contention, ld. DR has placed
reliance on the decision of ITAT Delhi in the case of Nokia India (P) Ltd. vs
DCIT reported as 214-TII-224-ITAT-DEL-TP and ahs drawn our attention towards
para no. 15 and 16 of this order and submitted that after considering the
ratio of all relevant judgments and orders, the ITAT Delhi categorically held
that the percentage of RPT to make a company as ineligible for comparison
should be taken as more than 25% and not 15% as suggested on behalf of the
assessee.

26\. On the issue of RPT, it has been contended by the ld. Counsel of the
assessee that 25% filter is not an appropriate filter for RPT and this test
cannot be applied mechanically as if it has statutorily provided without
exception. Ld. Counsel placing reliance on the decision of ITAT in the case of
Motorola Solutions India (P) Ltd. in ITA No.5637/D/11 submitted that the RPT
filter must not exceed 15%. Ld. Counsel vehemently contended that prerequisite
of arriving at ALP with the transaction of tested party should be benchmarked
with the uncontrolled transaction under Rule 10B(1)(e)(ii) of the Rules.
Finally, ld. counsel submitted that the filter should be restricted to 15% of
the total revenue. On careful consideration of above submissions, we are of
the view that the ITAT Delhi in the case of Nokia India (P) Ltd. (supra) held
that in principle if  24 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 any company
though functionally comparable but is more than specific percentage of RTP,
then the same should be ignored by treating as a controlled transaction. The
Tribunal in this order further held that the percentage of RPT to make the
company as ineligible for comparison should be taken as more than 25% and it
was held that a company can be considered as incomparable if its RPT exceeds
25%. The relevant operative part of this order in para 15 and 16 read as
under:-

> "15. The assessee has relied on the decision of BMW India Pvt. Ltd. vs.
> Addl. CIT (ITA No. 5354/D/2012) dated 16th August, 2013. The assessee has
> filed following additional written submissions to consider the judgment of
> BMW India P. Ltd. (supra) while deciding the issue relating to AMP on behalf
> of the assessee:

> "Subject: Additional Written Submission to consider the judgment of BMW
> India Pvt. Ltd. vs. Addl. CIT (I.T.A .No.-5354/DeIl2012) while deciding the
> issue relating to advertising, marketing and promotion ("AMP") on behalf of
> the Appellant. This is with respect to Motorola Solutions India Private
> Limited ("MSILP") appeal no. ITA 56371 Dell 2011 for Assessment Year ("AY")
> 2007-08. The hearings for the same were concluded on July 18, 2013 and the
> order was reserved on that date. The matter is now awaiting pronouncement of
> the decision by Your Honours. In the meantime the'!' Bench of the Hon'ble
> Income Tax Appellate Tribunal ("Tribunal"), New Delhi has pronounced its
> decision in the case of BMW India Pvt. Ltd. vs. Addl.. CIT (I.T.A .No.-
> 5354/DeI/2012 for AY 2008-09) ("BMW India order"). The said order was passed
> on August 16, 2013. Your Honours attention may kindly be drawn to the
> following: As mentioned in the BMW India order, BMW India acted as a
> distributor of motor vehicles and parts. During the year under consideration
> in the order, under the Transactional Net Margin method ("TNMM") applied by
> BMW India its operating profit margin was higher than the operating profit
> margin of the comparable companies. During the transfer pricing assessment
> proceedings, the Ld. Transfer pricing Officer ("TPO"), had alleged that BMW
> India had incurred excessive AMP expenses vis a vis the comparable companies
> and therefore, should have been reimbursed by the BMW Group for the
> excessive AMP spend based on the bright line analysis along with a mark-Up.
> The Hon'ble Dispute Resolution panel ("DRP") confirmed the additions made by
> the Ld. TPO.

On appeal by BMW India to the Hon'ble Tribunal, the Hon'ble Tribunal
pronounced its decision on various issues related to AMP. As already  25 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 mentioned above, BMW India was a distributor
during the year considered in the order. On these facts, the Hon'ble Tribunal
held that this case is distinguishable from the decision of the Special Bench
in L.G. Electronics case ("Special Bench") as the fact under consideration in
BMW India is the remuneration model of a distributor and not that of a
licensed manufacturer. The relevant text of the decision has been provided
hereunder: (Para 6.20, page 50 of BMW India order): Quote On examination of
contemporary Guidelines/jurisprudence on the subject, we are of the view that
a distributor is rewarded by the entity for whom the distributor works and the
rewards are guaranteed upto an extent and the risk component vis-a-vis a
manufacturer is necessarily very less. The rewards can be and generally are
based on pricing adjustments and can also be compensated over and above that
if greater services are rendered and pricing adjustments have not covered the
cost of routine services rendered. Generally speaking the remuneration model
for a distributor is reward-based and rewards are based on the quantity of
sales. Unquote The second point pronounced by the Hon'ble Tribunal was that
during the year under consideration in the order, BMW India's operating profit
margin was higher than that of the comparables. The comparable companies set
and their margins were not disputed by the Ld. TPO and the Hon'ble DRP. Hence,
the Hon'ble Tribunal held that the compensation for AMP services was embedded
in the pricing arrangement of the contract goods itself and that no further
compensation was required to be made by the Associated Enterprise ("AE"). In
other words, BMW India had received compensation for AMP expenses through
premium pricing which was demonstrated through its higher profit margins. The
relevant text of the Hon'ble Tribunal ruling in case of BMW India is provided
here below(Para 6.25, 6.26 page 53, 55 of BMW India order): Quote We hold that
in the facts of the present case the assessee has demonstrated that the
compensation for the higher services was embedded in the pricing arrangement
of the contract goods itself It is seen that the comparables identified by the
assessee and accepted by the TPO as having similar intensity functions have
earned profit at the gross and net levels far below the profits both at gross
and net levels as achieved by the assessee. In the circumstances as evidenced
from record, we are inclined to agree with the submissions advanced on behalf
of the assessee that no further compensation was required to be made by the AE
as the same has already been received. Thirdly, the Hon'ble Tribunal in BMW
India order provided that BMW India was rewarded by price adjustments to earn
profits which included the cost of AMP with mark up. It held that the tax
department cannot insist that the mode of compensation received by BMW India
from its AE necessarily had to be direct compensation and that pricing
adjustment was not acceptable. The relevant text of the Hon'ble Tribunal
ruling in case of BMW India is provided here below(Para 6.27, page 56 of BMW
India order): Quote The claim of the assessee has merit as the assessee with
the AE can agree to be rewarded/ remunerated by price adjustments to earn
profits  26 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 which include the cost of
rendering services with profit. The department cannot insist in the absence of
any provision under the Act that the mode of compensation to the assessee by
the foreign AE necessarily has to be directed compensation and pricing
adjustment is not accepted. Unquote The Hon'ble Tribunal further held that
(Para 6.26, page 55 of BMW India order): Quote In support of the remuneration
model of the assessee who is a distributor rewarded by way of price
adjustments to ensure profitability upto mutually accepted terms is a well-
recognized and well-accepted method for compensating a distributor. Unquote
Further, on the issue of the mark up the Hon'ble Tribunal in the BMW India
order held as under (Para 6.28, page 58 of BMW India order):

Quote We hold that in the facts of the present case there was no occasion for
the AE to further compensate the assessee for the services rendered towards
building the brand of the AE as the same already stood factored in the pricing
adjustment of the contract goods. As such the occasion to consider the
applicability of mark-up does not arise. Unquote The Hon'ble Tribunal, in para
no. 6.27 of the BMW India order has also mentioned that the Special Bench has
accepted that there are diverse nature of facts, business models and peculiar
terms and conditions of different assesses and there cannot be any straight
jacket formula.

Applicability to MSIPL As provided in the detailed hearings and submissions
provided, MSIPL for the relevant year under consideration also acted as a
distributor of mobile handsets, walkie-talkies and telecom equipment. During
the year under consideration, under the TNMM analysis the operating profit
margin on sales (OP/Sales) of MSIPL was higher than that of the comparable
companies. This has been mentioned in para 1 of page 1 of the written
submission filed with Your Honours on May 20, 2013 and again on para 5 of page
133 of the written submission filed with Your Honours on May 20,2013. The Ld.
TPO did not have any dispute relating to the TNMM analysis conducted by the
Appellant. The only dispute was on the matter of AMP expenses. The Ld. TPO
based on the bright line analysis held that MSIPL should have been reimbursed
by the AE for the excess AMP expenses incurred by it along with a mark-up. The
Appellant filed an appeal before the Hon'ble Tribunal. The grounds related to
AMP issue are covered in grounds nos. 2.1 to 2.10 and 3. (The details have
been mentioned in para 4-43 of page 2-23 of the written submission filed with
Your Honours on May 20, 2013 and again in para 8 of page 133-138 of the
written submission filed with Your Honours on May 20, 2013.) In this regard we
humbly submit that the decision in case of BMW India order also applies to
MSIPL, as the facts of MSIPL are similar to that in the BMW India order.
Hence, we humbly submit that the decision rendered in the BMW case has a
direct bearing on the AMP issue. This has been summarized as under:

1.BMW India is a distributor of motor vehicles and related parts. MSIPL is
also a distributor. Hence, what is relevant for consideration is the
remuneration model of a distributor in both the cases.  27 ITA No.882/D/2014
Asstt.Year: 2009-10

2.BMW India's operating margin was higher than that of the comparables.
Similarly, MSIPL also operated at a higher net operating margin than that of
the comparables. This is demonstrative of the fact that the compensation for
the alleged higher services was embedded in the pricing arrangement of the
contract goods itself and that no additional remuneration was required from
the AEs. In other words, like it has been held in the BMW India order, the
compensation for the alleged excess AMP expenses was received through premium
pricing which can also be demonstrated through its higher profit margins.

In the BMW India order, the Hon'ble Tribunal has held that the department
cannot insist that pricing adjustment cannot be accepted as mode of
compensation. Herein, it may be reiterated, that MSIPL has already received
the said pricing adjustment through credit notes as a cost credit! purchase
price adjustment from its AEs. This has been mentioned in para no 18 of page
11 of the written submission filed with Your Honours on May 20, 2013 and in
para 8(1) of page 134 of the written submission filed with Your Honours on May
20, 2013."

15.1 Thus, the main contention of assessee is that remuneration model in case
of Distributor towards AMP Expenses is different from the compensation model
in case of License Manufacturer. Therefore, before considering the application
of BMW's case to assessee's case, it is necessary that the business profile of
assessee's case viz-a-viz BMW's case with reference to LG's Spl. Bench case is
to be considered. Admittedly, the decision in the LG's case has been rendered
in regard to AMP Expenses and for quantification of AMP Expenses also detailed
guidelines have been laid down in the case of LG. 15.2 In case of LG
Electronics brief facts were as under: "The factual matrix of the case is that
L.G. Electronics Inc. (hereinafter called as ―LGKǁ), is a Korean based
company, engaged in the business of manufacture, sale and distribution of
electronic products and electrical appliances such as television, audio/video
equipments, washing machines, refrigerators and air- conditioners etc.
Pursuant to the approval of the Govt. of India, conveyed vide letter dated
29-1-1997, LGK was permitted to establish a wholly owned subsidiary in India.
L.G. Electronics India Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter called as ―LGIǁ), that is the
assessee in question, was incorporated in 1997 as a wholly owned subsidiary of
LGK. An agreement was entered between LGK and LGI on 10th March 1997, as per
which both entered into a mutual foreign collaboration agreement. Thereafter a
Technical assistance and royalty agreement was entered into between these two
entities on 1-7- 2001 by which LGI, in the capacity of a licensee, obtained a
right to use the technical information, designs, drawings and industrial
property rights for the manufacture, marketing, sale and services of the
agreed products from the LGK i.e. the licensor."

16\. In assessee's case the factual matrix has been reproduced earlier.
Assessee is primarily engaged in the distribution of telecom equipment, mobile
phones and provision of telecommunication service in India. The company also
provides software development services to the group companies. Additionally
the company also provides marketing and  28 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year:
2009-10 administrative support services to its group company. In the case of
BMW the factual matrix was as under: 2.4 "A perusal of the same shows that the
TPO took note of the facts that the BMW Group has global operations in 3
segments namely Automobiles, Motorcycles and Financial Services. The parent
company of the group is BMW AG i.e. the associated enterprise (hereinafter
referred to as the "AE") which is headquartered in Munich, Germany and is
primarily engaged in the manufacturing of automobiles and motorcycles. The
major car brands manufactured by BMW AG are stated to be BMW, Mini and Rolls-
Royce. The TPO takes note of the fact that the assessee had undertaken the
following international transactions:

    
    
    1.             Purchase of raw material             167,051,934             TNMM
    
     2.              Purchase of traded vehicle    535,438,461                  RPM
     3.              Purchase of spare parts        18,057,016                  RPM
     4.              Purchase of fixed assets      175,346,819                  CUP
     5.              Purchase of software           78,880,000                  CUP
     6.              Receipt of technical support   29,449,506                  CUP
                     service
     7.              Receipt of IT support services 2,739,917                   CUP
     8.              Market survey expenses         11,711,690                  CUP
     9.              Reimbursement of personal cost 17,252,074                  CUP
     10.             Reimbursement of expenses      12,270,724                  CUP
     11.             Interest of loan               12,9773,291                 CUP
    
    
    
    
    

2.5 Referring to the Transfer Pricing Study of the assessee, the TPO observed
that the assessee described its activities as that of a distributor. The TPO
referred to the Importation Agreement between the parent company BMW AG and
the assessee and observed that the same had been entered into w.e.f.
01.01.2006 and it stated that the assessee had the following duties in regard
to marketing and promotion of the products of the parent company: "2.2.
Responsibility in the Contract Territory BMW India represents the interest of
BMW AG in the Contract Territory. It is responsible for the sale promotion and
the full utilization of the market potential for the Contract Goods in the
Contract Territory.

It is further responsible for ensuring the provision of the best possible
customer service and adequate stocks of original BMW parts in the Contract
Territory. Furthermore, BMW India undertakes the following functions in the
Contract Territory in accordance with the laws of the contracting territory: •
Establishment and supervision of an efficient BMW distribution network; •
Performance of an adequate advertisement and sales promotion as well as public
and media relations.

• Collection, evaluation and communication of market information to BMW AG.

29 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

3\. Scope of the Activity of BMW India 3.1 BMW India will meet its
responsibility for the promotion of sales and the full utilization of the
market potential for the Contract Goods by applying its best efforts and
adequate resources toward effective sales promotion and advertising for the
Contract Goods including available optional equipment and accessories."

27\. In view of above, we are inclined to accept the contention of the ld. CIT
DR because there is no straitjacket formula given in either section 92A(2)(b)
or in Rule 92A(2)(b) or in Rule 10B of the Rules for applying filter to the
related party transactions, however, it is a well-settled proposition that if
any company is functionally comparable with the taxpayer but at the same time
it is more than a specific percentage of RTP, then the same should be ignored
by treating it as a controlled transaction and hence, the view taken by the
ITAT Delhi in the case of Nokia India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) is a balanced view
supported by various orders of the Tribunal on the issue. Therefore, we are
inclined to accept the contention of the ld. CIT DR that a company should be
considered as non-comparable only if its RPT exceeds 25%.

28\. The next issue for our consideration is the functional comparability of
the assessee Bechtel India with CIEL. We have already noted the functional
profile of the taxpayer assessee in para 16 as stated above. That the
functional profile of CIEL has been submitted by the ld. Counsel of the
assessee which explains the details of services offered by CIEL, area of
certification expertise and another important area of energy efficiency audit
functions by the assessee CIEL. The relevant operative part reads as under:-
30 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 "4. Services Offered by CEIL:

CEIL is India's leading Certification and Inspection agency for offshore Oil &
Gas Process & Well platforms, Petro-chemical Refineries, Submarine and Cross
country Pipelines etc. CEIL provides services designed to suit project
requirements throughout the life span of a plant / facility from concept to
commissioning, revamping and health check. It promotes Safety, Quality and
Reliability throughout the design and operating life of all types of
equipment, structures, pressure vessels, pipelines and rotating machinery. The
services cover all types of capital goods and equipment during manufacture and
erection stages for oil & gas and general engineering sectors, encompassing; ~
Review of Detailed Engineering ~ Independent Analysis and Review of
Designs/Drawings ~Conformance of Materials & Equipments to
National/International Codes -

~ Review and Approval of Inspection Test Plans ~Review of Installation, Pre-
commissioning and Commissioning Procedures ~ Third Party Inspection Services /
Pre-shipment Inspection ~ Supervision of Site Construction for cross country
water / gas pipelines ~ PMC Services for Infra structure projects of
Municipalities ~ HAZOP Studies / Quantitative Risk Analysis ~ Mitigation
Measures Report with recommendations to reduce the risk factor is issued after
studying the above.

5.7 Energy Efficiency Audit In addition to Certification Services, CEIL also
carries out Energy Audit, Base Line Verification of energy intensive
facilities e.g. pumping stations, municipal lighting, and commercial buildings
as per client's requirements. CEIL is also prepared to provide Energy Service
Contracting services (ESCO) for rehabilitation / replacement of energy
inefficient equipments / appliances and to be paid back from affected savings
in energy consumption.

6\. Areas of Certification Expertise:

CEIL avails a total synergetic support of its parent company EIL which has
skilled and experienced professionals located at Head Office and spread across
India and abroad who are fully conversant with national and international
codes backed by over  31 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 4 million man
hours of experience. It has on its roll Engineers qualified by various
recognized NDT bodies like ASNT, ISNT and QMS.

CEIL's expertise covers Design Verification, Quality Services and
Commissioning Assistance on:

~ High pressure Reactors, Pressure Vessels, Columns, Heat Exchangers,
Reformers of carbon steel, stainless steel, alloy steels & non ferrous
materials ~ Clad Columns, Storage Tanks, Horton Spheres, Mounded Tanks ~
Equipment for Combustible / Explosive Classifications, Occupational Safety and
Hazardous Area Classifications ~ Instrument Air / Plant Air Systems, Air
Drying Plants, Gas dehydration units ~ Heating, Ventilation and Air
Conditioning (HVAC) Systems ~ Line Pipes, Pipe Coating and Piping
Appurtenances "

29\. In view of above, the assessee taxpayer Bechtel India which is rendering
engineering support services including related design and drawing as per
specification of its foreign AE Bechtel Corporation USA cannot be compared
with a company which is engaged in the functions of third party inspections
(TPI), certification of equipment supplied by vendors & installation of work
of contractors of ONGC and other government departments and private sector
undertakings. The CIEL having domestic consumers, government companies and
public sector undertaking having insignificant export surplus cannot be
compared with the assessee Bechtel India which is 100% exporter of services to
its AE Bechtel Corporation, USA.

30\. We may point out that functions of a company should be determined having
regard to its data mentioned in the financial results filed along with  32 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 return of income and annual report which is
a primary resource and general information in the annual report is more
accurate and this fact has not been controverted by the ld. CIT DR. From the
functional profile of assessee Bechtel India and functional profile of CIEL as
reproduced hereinabove, it is amply clear that the CIEL carries on business of
certification and third party inspection of equipments provided by a
contractor and obviously certification and TPI functions are dissimilar form
the business of rendering engineering support services including related
design and drawing as per specifications of foreign AE and by using
intangibles/IPR of parent company.

31\. Ld. DR could not demolish this factum that the certification/TPI involves
testing/assessing and auditing of the work done by the high-end technocrats
which conforms to specifications prescribed in the contract; meets quality
standard of work and material; meets safety standards; meets environmental
standards and satisfactory works, plant commissioning and installation of
various works and projects for the employer like ONGC. The CIEL certifies the
work of the contractor that the employer accepts the work undertaken as per
specifications of the contract and then makes the payment. Per contra, the
business functional profile of assessee company is to perform the work of
preparing and supplying design and drawings given by its parent Bechtel
Corporation USA. In this modus operandi this work is outsourced by the non-
resident AE to the assessee Bechtel India which carry out the work as per
specifications given by the outsourcing company AE. We may also point out  33
ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 that the revenue of CIEL form export of
surplus is 3% which is insignificant and the income from export of services by
the asessee Bechtel India is 100% of operating income as there is no domestic
client, thus, as per Rule 10B(2)(d) of the Rules, the comparability test also
fails on this count.

32\. On the basis of foregoing discussion, we have no hesitation to hold that
the functions of assessee Bechtel India are quite dissimilar with CIEL which
was wrongly taken by the TPO as a suitable comparable for benchmarking of
impugned international transaction undertaken by the assessee during the
relevant financial period. The functional dissimilarity as well as distinction
in the geographical market in the light of foreign exchange fluctuation risk
of the assessee company coupled with below 25% RPT undertaken by the CIEL, we,
therefore, decline to agree with the conclusion of the AO/DRP/TPO that the
CIEL is a suitable comparable for the purpose of proposed TP adjustment made
by the authorities below. Functional dissimilarity and other aspects cannot be
ignored and these factors clearly demonstrate that CIEL should not have been
included in the final set of comparables for making transfer pricing
adjustment pertaining to the impugned international transactions of the
assessee company and we order to exclude the same from the final set of
comparables. It is ordered accordingly.

Corporate issue of Mark to Market losses Ground no. 5 to 5.4

33\. On the issue of Mark to Market losses, the ld. counsel reiterating its
written submissions dated 17.6.2015 pointed out that the assessee claimed mark
34 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 to market losses of Rs.21.80 crore on
foreign exchange forward contracts as on 31.3.09 which was wrongly disallowed.
Ld. Counsel of the assessee further pointed out that the AO erred in holding
that the Mark to Market losses in respect of re-measuring the foreign exchange
forward contract as on balance sheet date are notional and contingent in
nature which are not allowable. Ld. Counsel vehemently pointed out that the AO
further erred in placing reliance on Instruction No. 3/2010 dated 23rd March
2010 issued with respect of assessees trading in forex derivatives and these
instructions were issued after completion of financial period under
consideration, thus, the same was not applicable to the assessee and further
said instruction is ultra vires to the scope of section 119 of the Act.

34\. Ld. Counsel also contended that the AO erred in holding that Mark to
Market losses in respect of re-measuring the foreign exchange forward contract
as on balance sheet date is not allowable as the forward contracts have not
been taken for the purpose of business on raising of export invoice but taken
without due exposure. Ld. counsel has further drawn our attention towards
order of ITAT in assessee's own case for AY 2008-09 reported as Bechtel India
Pvt. India Ltd vs ACIT(2013) 33 Taxman.com 213 (Delhi Tribunal) and submitted
that the mark to market losses in respect of foreign exchange forward
contracts as on the balance sheet date was allowed to the assessee. Ld.
counsel of the assessee also took us through the written submissions dated
13.6.15 filed on 17.6.15 which read as under:-

35 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 "Schedule XIII - A. Significant
Accounting Policies:- " iv) Foreign exchange transactions Foreign exchange
transactions are recorded at the exchange rate prevailing at the date of
transaction. Realized gains and losses on foreign exchange transactions during
the year are recognized in the Profit and Loss Account. Foreign currency
monetary assets and liabilities are translated to India Rupees at year end
rates and any resulting gain/loss on such translation is also recognized in
the Profit and Loss Account.

v) Forward foreign exchange contracts The company enters into forward foreign
exchange contracts with the bankers to mitigate the risks associated with
foreign exchange fluctuations associated with the accounts receivable and
forecasted sales transactions. Any premium or discount arising at the
inception of the forward exchange contract, which have been taken on
underlying transaction, is recognized as expenses/income over the life of the
contract and exchange differences arising on such forward exchange contract is
recognized in the Profit and Loss account in the reporting period in which the
exchange rate changes. The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts,
which have been taken to cover foreign exchange risk in respect of probable
forecasted transactions, being the difference between the contracted rate and
forward rate at the Balance Sheet date, are recognized in the profit and loss
account. "

(Pg. 470 & 476/Vol.II) The following table sums up the facts :- Rs. In Crores
(Rs. In Cr.) (rounded) a. All 9 foreign exchange forward contracts (F.C) were
entered 119.50 With authorized bank on 6.8.2008 maturing every successive
Month starting from 3.4.2009 to 4.12.2009 b. Export sales booked during
Financial Year 2008-09 178.36 Financial year 2007-08 159.23 c. Receivables as
on 31.3.2009 71.64 Receivables as on 31.3.2009 41.61 d. Foreign exchange (USD)
actually received in Financial Year 2008-09 156.72  36 ITA No.882/D/2014
Asstt.Year: 2009-10 Financial year 2007-08 167.31 e. Value of Unexpired FCs as
on 31.3.2009 119.50 Value of unexpired FCs as on 31.3.2008 96.00 f. Invoices
raised by 6.8.2008 (pg. 362/P.B. Vol.-II) 58.09 g. All 9 contracts were
ultimately settled through delivery of contracted Rs. 119.50 crores worth of
U.S. dollars.

Ref : a) Pg. 61-66 of P.B. Vol.-I

b) Pg. 355 of P.B. Vol.II

c) Pgs. 751-753 of P.B. Vol. IV

d) Draft assessment order for A.Y. 2010-11 Pg. 754/PB Vol.-4.

e) Assessment order u/s 143(3)/144C dated 30.1.2015 for A.Y. 2010-11 (para 6
at Annexure 1)

4\. Ld. DRP :

> i) Ignores accounting policy followed by assesee for Pg. 462-476 & 450-
> foreign exchange (forward) transactions. 51/P.B.Vol.-II, AS 11 & AS 30 read
> with AS 1.

ii) The DRP ignores the judgment of Hon'b1e Delhi High Court in Virtual Soft
Systems Ltd. (341 ITR 593) brought to its notice. It has been held therein
that:- "10 .... the fact that the opinion of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India was expressed in a Guidance Note which had not attained a
mandatory status, would not provide a basis to the Assessing Officer to
disregard the books of account of the assessee and in effect method of
accounting for leases, followed by the assessee. "

iii) The action of the Ld. DRP is illegal in not following the order of the
Hon'ble Tribunal for A.Y. 2008-09 without distinguishing it on facts. As held
by the Hon'b1e Supreme Court in C1T Vs. Ralson Industries Ltd. (288 ITR 322),
"where an order is passed by a higher authority, the lower authority is bound
thereby keeping in view the principles of natural justice". It is significant
to note the DRP's order dt. 26.11.2013 is appealable u/s 253(1)(d) of the Act
and was not binding on the Department.

iv) Holds Supreme Court decision in Woodward Governor is not applicable. Pg.
382/P.B.Vol.-II

v) Follows CBDT Instruction no. 3/2010.

37 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

vi) DRP selectively quotes guidelines issued by RBI. It ignores the Foreign
Exchange Management (Foreign exchange derivative contracts) Regulations, 2000
readwith Schedule 1 of the Regulation-4. The said Schedule states that a
forward fore. contract can be booked by an authorized dealer on the basis of
reasonable estimate after verifying the documentary evidence. (Ref. Pgs.
728-733 of PB Vol.-IV).

vii) The Chart at Pg. 751/Vol.-IV, which summaries, the year-wise position of
forex booked/ receivables etc. is at Annexure-2A.

viii) The DRP verifies FIRCs and does not dispute that all the FCs were
ultimately selected through delivery of contracted amount of US dollars. (Para
3.7.1 at Pg. 36 of DRP order at Pg. 65 of P13 Vol.-I).

5\. The Ld. DRP alleges that the FCs were not taken out by the assessee for
business purpose. This bald allegation is not substantiated by the DRP.
Further, the allegation made by the Ld. DRP is self- contradictory. In the
preceding assessment year, the Ld. AO had disallowed similar Mark to Market
accounting of loss on unmatured FCs on the last date of accounting year; i.e.,
31.3.2008. However, this loss has been allowed by the AOIDRP in the succeeding
assessment year 2009-10 on cash basis. Thus, the DRP admits that foreign
exchange forward contracts are not speculative and they are also for' business
purpose. The facts this year are same as in the preceding A.Y. 2008-09.
Similarly, actual loss on the FC on maturity have been allowed in the
succeeding assessment year 2010-11. (Tile chart summarizing the effect of the
orders is at (Pg. 753/Vol.- IV Annexure 2B)

6\. Findings of the Hon'ble Tribunal in A.Y. 2008-09:-

i) Forex fluctuation loss on unexpired FCs booked on 31.3.2008 is covered by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in the case of Woodward Governer (312 ITR
254)

ii) The assessee follow mercantile system and the loss is booked on a
scientific basis in the ordinary course of business.

iii) The loss has been incurred for hedging of foreign currency fluctuation
involved in export sales; which is a business decision to safeguard its
interest.

38

ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

iv) This loss is not notional and it is business loss. It has to be allowed
following the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Woodward Governer case.

CBDT Instruction no. 3 duly noted by Tribunal (Pg. 365/Vol.- II) Transactions
not speculative u/s 43(5):-

7\. Alternatively; the DRP, after examining all the invoices raised by the
assessee on AEs, holds the FCs' to be speculative transactions as It found
that the aggregate amount of 'invoices raised' did not cover the exposure as
per the FCs booked by the assessee with Bank of America on 6th August 2008.
According to DRP, the assessee should have booked the FCs only after it had
raised an invoice and only to the extent of amount as per each and everyone of
the hundreds of invoices raised by the assessee under continuous service
contracts with the AEs, which normally run for several months overlapping more
than one financial year. The sample FCs and corresponding invoices, which run
into hundreds, are at Pgs. 737-743 of Vol.-IV.

The Ld. DRP has failed to appreciate that it would be not only unpractical,
but will also be extremely costly proposition to take out forward contract for
everyone of the hundreds of invoices issued to the AE under each of the
service contracts (Ref. TP Study at Pg. 582/Vol.-III). It is for this reason
that the RBI regulations clearly provide that where the amount is not
ascertainable the forward contract may be taken on the basis reasonable
estimate expected export receipts.

8\. The Ld. ORP has erred in treating clauses of proviso to section 43(5) as
sub-sections of that section. It has thus erred in law in applying proviso (b)
and (d) to section 43(5) of the Act. The proviso merely excepts transactions,
which are other-wise speculative under main without first ascertaining as to
whether the FC transactions are speculative as per section 43(5).

9\. The Ld. DRP, after verifying all the Forex Inward Remittance Certificates
(FIRC), admits that all Forward Contracts were  39 ITA No.882/D/2014
Asstt.Year: 2009-10 ultimately settled through the delivery of prescribed
quantity of US dollars on the due date. This was brought to the notice of ORP
vide letter dt. 12.11.2013 at Pg. 354IVol.-IJ. Hence, the settlement of FCs
through actual delivery of US dollars have been wrongly treated as speculative
transactions u/s 43(5) of the Act.

10\. DRP holds that FCs are covered by "section 43 (5)(b)" and "section 43
(5)(d)". Apparently, reference is to the proviso (b) and (d) to section 43(5)
of the Act. Thus, the Ld. DRP has erred in invoking the proviso to section
43(5) without bringing the transaction into the fold of main section.

There is no dispute that all forward contracts were "ultimately" settled
through delivery of the underlying commodity, i.e., U.S. dollars. The Ld.
D.R.P. itself has recognised this fact as may be seen from the Tables at Pg.
32 & 37 of ORP order (Pg. 61& 66IVol-f). This being the undisputed factual
position, the impugned transactions clearly do not fall within the meaning of
the term 'speculative transaction' as defined in section 43(5) of the Act. It
may be noted that for the purpose of section 43(5), it is not necessary, or
even relevant, that the forward contract is settled within the accounting
year. What is relevant is that it is ultimately settled through delivery of
the commodity contracted for. Further, as held by the Apex Court, if the
transaction satisfies the condition of 'actual delivery' of the contracted
commodity, the transaction cannot be held to be speculative. (Ref. Devenport
and Co. P. Ltd. Vs. CIT (1975) 100 ITR 715 (SC) at Pg. 759/vol.-IV). Proviso
to Sec. 43(5) not applicable:-

11\. Since the main section 43(5) of the Act is not applicable to the facts of
the case, the Ld. ORP erred in law in invoking. the proviso to that section.
The ORP's action of invoking the proviso to Sec. 43(5) is manifestly
erroneous. It is settled law that- if a contract is ultimately settled by way
of actual delivery (as opposed to constructive delivery) of the underlying
commodity, it is not speculative. (Ref. Davenport & Co. P. Ltd. Vs. CIT 100
ITR 715,  40 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 SC). Also see the Hon'ble
Tribunal in London Star Diamond Co. Vs. DCIT [2013J 38 Taxmann.com 338 (Mum.
Trib).

12\. Considering the fact that all the FCs are ultimately settled through
delivery of US dollars.

it's clear that the decisions of the Tribunal/ High Court relied on to by the
DRP are not relevant as all those decisions deal with a situation where
contract is cancelled because of non-delivery of dollars and settlement is
reached by paying the difference between the contracted price and the price of
the commodity on the date of settlement.

AO/DRP in A.V. 2010-11:-

13\. In the succeeding A.Y. 2010-11, the actual loss incurred was Rs. 15.75
crores and the remaining amount of Rs. 6.05 crores was offered to tax by the
assessee in its return for A. Y. 20 10-11, which is accepted by the AO. (Re
.Pg. 753 & 754I Vol.-IV). The DRP has also not interfered with the decision of
the AO. Thus we have a situation where AO/DRP have treated FCs to be non-
speculative transaction entered into by the assessee company for business
purpose in the immediately preceding and succeeding year."

35\. Ld. DR supporting the action of the AO/DRP submitted that the assessee
company does not specify the test of transaction that have been excluded under
the extant provision as deemed speculative transaction because it had not
clearly demonstrated that the transactions were in respect of raw material or
merchandise; the assessee is not a member and the assessee company failed to
demonstrate that the transaction in question were 'has in' transactions in
absence of details of forex forward contracts which were not linked to the
trade/export. Ld. CIT DR further pointed out that the assessee is not a member
of a forward market or an exchange and it is not the business of the assessee
41 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 company to undertake foreign exchange
forward contracts. Ld. CIT DR further pointed out that forward contracts on
certain dates could have been of higher value than the export receivables and
as such, the assessee did not demonstrate rupee to rupee and date specific
correlation between the FCs and the export invoices, specially when few
forward contracts cancelled before the maturity dates clearly demonstrate the
characteristics of speculation activity. Placing reliance on the decision of
Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the case of CIT vs Badridas Gauridu Pvt. Ltd.
(2004) 134 Taxman 376 (Bombay) submitted that this aspect/issue needs to be
examined in details so as to consider the nature of such losses to adjudicate
the allowability and in that case the matter was set aside by the Tribunal on
this issue as the assessee had not furnished requisite details to the AO.

36\. Ld. CIT DR further pointed out that in the case of DCIT vs Bank of
Bahrain and Kuwait in ITA No. 4404 & 1883/Mum/2004 the Special Bench of ITAT
Mumbai while holding that mark to market losses in respect of forward foreign
exchange contracts debited to profit and loss account is allowable and at the
same time, CBDT Instruction No. 3/2010 mandates that instruction from CBDT
were either not pointed out to the ITAT or was subsequent to this order. Ld.
CIT DR also vehemently contended that the question in the said case was
whether mark to market loss was a real loss or a notional loss and the issue
of speculation u/s 43(5) was not before the Tribunal and hence benefit of the
Special Bench order for claiming allowability cannot be extended to the  42
ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 assessee. Ld. CIT DR also pointed out
that the special bench order was passed in the case of assessee bank and
assessee of the present case is an engineering service provider assessee so
the business profile varies substantially.

37\. Replying to the above ld. Counsel of the assessee also placed written
rejoinder to the written reply and submissions of the DR on the issue of mark
to market losses, ld. Counsel submitted that the contentions of the ld. CIT DR
are misconceived, that the assessee fails to satisfy any of the clauses of the
proviso to section 43(5) of the Act, therefore, mark to market loess of
forward contracts are not allowable being speculation losses. Ld. Counsel
strongly contended that merely the ld. CIT DR reiterating the view as
expressed by the ld. DRP and the DRP has ignored the main provisions of
section 43(5) of the Act as the revenue has to show as to how the present case
is covered by the definition of speculative transaction as defined in section
43(5) of the Act. Ld. Counsel also pointed out that the assessee accounts for
forward contract loss based upon a consistency followed by accounting policy
as stated in its final audited statement and since all forward contracts are
settled by the actual delivery of contracted amount, therefore, it is not a
speculative transaction u/s 43(5) of the Act. Ld. counsel also pointed out
that the assessee accounts for forward contract loss based upon consistency,
followed by accounting policy as stated in its final audited statement and
since all forward contracts are settled by the actual delivery of contracted
amount, therefore, it is not a speculative  43 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year:
2009-10 transaction u/s 43(5) of the Act and there is no question of
applicability of proviso to the said provision.

38\. Placing reliance on the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Devenport & Co. Pvt. Ltd. vs CIT 100 ITR 715 submitted that a transaction
which is otherwise speculative would not be a speculative transaction within
the meaning of Explanation (2) if actual delivery of the commodity or the
scrips has taken place. Ld. Counsel lastly pointed out that in the similar set
of facts and circumstances, the issue has already been decided in favour of
the assessee by the Tribunal for AY 2008-09 in assessee's own case (supra).

39\. On careful consideration of above submissions of both the sides, at the
very outset, we find it appropriate to reproduce written reply of the ld. CIT
DR on the issue of mark to market losses, written submissions of the assessee
as already reproduced herein above. The relevant written submissions of the
ld. CIT DR read as under: -

"Synopsis of DR submissions Date of submission: 09/0712014 Name of Assessee:
Bechtel India P Limited AY: 2009-10 ITA No.: 882/D/2014 May the Hon'ble 'I'
Bench be pleased to consider:

44 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 Note on Forex Hedging Losses:

The company's case does not satisfy the test of transactions that have been
excluded under the extant provisions as deemed speculative transactions as:

\- it had not clearly demonstrated that the hedging transactions were with
respect to raw materials or merchandise:

\- the assessee is not a member of a forward market or an exchange.

\- The Company failed to demonstrate that the transactions in question were
hedging transactions as no details were furnished.

-the details of forex forward contracts were not linked to the trade/export. 

-FCs on certain dates could have been of higher value than the export receivables. As such, the assessee did not demonstrate rupee-to-rupee and date-specific correlation between the FCs and the export invoices. 

\- Apparently few Forward Contracts cancelled before the maturity date. which
was a characteristic of speculation activity or there were any alterations.

In view of the above, the following submissions are made: A. Forward Contracts
are to be treated as commodity as held in 38 taxmann.com 338 (Mumbai-Trib.).
Reliance on the decision or the Bombay High Court in the case of CIT v.
Badridas Gauridu Pvt Ltd 2004 134 Taxrnan 376 (Bombay) and UT v. Soorajmull
Nagarmull [1981] 129 ITR 169 (Cal) in the case of London Star Diamond Company
(I) P. Ltd v. DCIT [2013] 38 taxrnann.com 338 (Mumbai- Trib.). Relevant
extract of para 19 of the judgment reads as under: "Para /9. The above-------
.Although there is decision of the Tribunal where it is held that the FCs are
not commodities, considering the judgment of Hon'ble High court of Calcutta in
the case of Sooraj Mull Magarmull supra, which was followed by the judgment of
jurisdictional High Court in the case of Badridas Gauridu Pvt Ltd (supra),
needs to be followed by us. The principle of "judicial discipline" assumes
importance and therefore, the "commodity" includes the forward contract'.
Thus, in principle, the forward contracts, being commodity, should fall in the
definition of 'speculation transaction' and the same is subjected to
fulfilment of other conditions specified in sub-section (5) of section -43 of
the Act. Having held so, we shall now examine if the impugned
contracts/transactions constitute "hedging transactions" and covered by the
exclusion provisions of clause (a) to the proviso to section 43(5) of the Act.
"

Further, the paras 34, 35 & 36 of the order need to be examined in details so
as to consider the nature of such losses which require  45 ITA No.882/D/2014
Asstt.Year: 2009-10 detailed examination to see the allowabilty. In this case,
the matter was set aside by IT AT on this issue as the assessee had not
furnished requisite details to the AO.

Mumbai Tribunal - S. Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt. Ltd. v. Addl CIT (2013-
TIOL-452- ITAT -MUM) has held such transactions to be Speculative in nature.
Assessee was in the business of manufacturing and export of diamonds and
claimed deduction for loss in tax return on account of exchange rate
fluctuations, including loss on forward contracts squared up during the year
and marked-to-market losses on outstanding contracts at the year end. The
Assessing Officer (' AO') and the CIT(A) disallowed the loss and treated the
loss as 'speculation loss', relying on an instruction and circular issued by
the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) regarding this matter (Instruction
No.] 3 of 2010dated 23 March 2010 and Circular No.23 of 1960 dated 12
September 1960).

In this case, ITAT Mumbai has drawn a distinction between hedging transaction
and speculative transaction, observing that 'speculative transaction' is a
contract for purchase or sale of any commodity, stocks or shares that is
periodically or ultimately settled otherwise than by actual delivery or
transfer of the commodity or scrip & on the other hand, a hedging transaction
is a contract entered into to protect against possible price fluctuations in
the commodity / goods traded by the assessee. ITA T has formulated seven tests
to determine a hedging transaction as a non speculative transaction For the
purpose of clause

(a) of proviso to section 43(5) of the Act. The ITAT Mumbai noted that as the
assessee was a dealer in diamonds, hence only forward contracts in diamonds
could be treated as hedging contracts. Further, the forward contracts for
foreign exchange were closed without actual delivery. Assessee was also unable
to establish that booking and cancellation of forward contracts of foreign
exchange were in respect of specified export or import. Hence, the loss on
forward contract on cancellation and marked-to- market on outstanding
contracts as on year end on hedging foreign exchange risk was held to be a
speculative contract.

B. Explanation to S. 37(1) inserted by the Finance Act 1998 with retrospective
effect from 1-4-1962 reads as under: "Explanation - For the removal of doubts,
it is hereby declared that any expenditure incurred by an assessee for any
purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law shall not be deemed
to have  46 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 been incurred for the
purpose of business or profession and no deduction or allowance shall be made
in respect of such expenditure." The forex derivative contracts entered into
in excess of the underlying foreign exchange exposure of the assessee are
apparently in violation of the guidelines of RBl and FEMA and therefore hit by
Explanation to S. 37(1).

This explanation impliedly leads us to the conclusion that such losses on FCs
are not allowable to the assessee. CBDT has also issued Instruction No. 03/20
I 0, dated 23-3-2010 to assessing officers regarding the loss on account of
currency derivatives. The crux of the said instruction is as under:

(I) In respect of MTM losses debited to Profit and Loss account, the
AssessingOfficers are instructed to disallow the same while computing the
taxable income.

(2) In respect of actual or crystallized losses, the Assessing Officers are
instructed to verify whether the losses are on account of speculative
transaction as specified u/s.43(5) and decide in accordance with law.

The above instructions render claims of deduction for mark to mark losses
provided for in the books in respect of open contracts untenable. However, to
be fair, it may also be pointed out that in the case DCIT v. Bank of Bahrain
and Kuwait, (ITA Nos. 4404 & 1883/Mum./2004 reported in www.itatonline.org)
the Special Bench of Mumbai ITAT, while holding that MTM losses in respect of
forward foreign exchange contracts debited to profit and loss account is
allowable, has made the following observations:

(i) A binding obligation accrued against the assessee the minute it entered
intoforward foreign exchange contracts.

(ii) A consistent method of accounting followed by the assessee cannot be
disregarded only on the ground that a better method could be adopted.

(iii) The assessee has consistently followed the same method of accounting in
regard to recognition of profit or loss both, in respect of forward foreign
exchange contract as per the rate prevailing on March 31.

(iv) A liability is said to have crystallised when a pending obligation on
thebalance sheet date is determinable with reasonable certainty. The
considerations for accounting the income are entirely on different footing.

47 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

(v) As per AS-II, when the transaction is not settled in the same accounting
period as that in which it occurred, the exchange difference arises over more
than one accounting period.

(vi) The forward foreign exchange contracts have all the trappings of stock-
in- trade.

(vii) In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Woodward
Governor India (I) P. Ltd., the assessee's claim is allowable.

(viii) In the ultimate analysis, there is no revenue effect and it is only the
timing of taxation of loss/profit.

This creates a situation where on one hand a Special Bench decision allows MTM
losses, while on the other hand CBDT Instruction mandates disallowance.
Apparently, the instruction from CBDT was either not pointed out to the ITAT
or was subsequent to this order. Also, the question in the said case was
whether MTM loss was a real loss or notional loss and the issue of speculation
under 43(5) was not an issue before the ITA T.

On this background, the benefit of this Special Bench order for claiming
allowability of MTM losses despite the instruction to the contrary by the CBDT
is not available especially due to the facts that the assessee failed to
discharge its onus on giving real time data. Besides, the assessee in our case
is Engg. Service exporter whereas this AB order was rendered for a bank, so
the business profile varies substantially. C. Recent:

RBI in order to regulate the currency market volatility has allowed the
trading in currency future and forward on April 20,2007. As there was
difficulty in managing the currency future along depending on FOREX with other
derivatives traded in Security exchange market depending on SENSEX, therefore,
RBI and SEBI formed a standing committee to analyze the trade in currency
forward and future market around the world and thus laying down the guideline
to introduce and manage the exchange traded currency future market in India.
The committee submitted the report on May 29,2008 . RBI and SEBI are now
cooperating and working together to manage this segment of future and option
trading in India. Various currency derivatives have been introduced by NSE and
MCX to make Indian Securities market globally competitive and larger. The
issue therefore calls for detailed adjudication and is not covered in favour
of the assessee."

40\. We further find it appropriate to reproduce written submission/rejoinder
of the assessee to the written reply/submissions of the ld. CIT DR dated  48
ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 19.6.2015 which were placed before us on
26.6.15. For the sake of clarity in our findings, rejoinder to the written
submissions of the ld. CIT DR is being reproduced below:-

> "BEFORE THE HON'BLE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL, DELHI BENCH 'I-1' NEW
> DELHI Bechtel India Private Limited ITA No.882/Del12014 Assessment Year:
> 2009-10 Rejoinder to the Written Submission of the Learned Departmental
> Representative (Ld. DR) in respect of the 'Mark to Market' loss of Rs. 21.80
> crores as on 31.03.2009 on the foreign exchange forward contracts (FCs) It
> is humbly submitted that this Rejoinder may kindly be read along with the
> Corporate Tax Submission dated 17.06.2015 submitted before your Honours
> Rejoinder:

> l. The Ld. CIT (DR) has emphasized that the assessee fails to satisfy any of
> the clauses of the proviso to section 43(5) of the Act. Therefore, marked to
> market losses on FCs are not allowable, being speculation losses.

> This contention is misconceived. The Ld. CIT (DR) merely reiterates the same
> view as expressed by the Ld. DRP. Both the Ld. DRP &CIT(DR) have ignored the
> main provision of section 43(5) . They have in the first place, failed to
> show as to how the impugned case is covered by the definition of
> 'speculative transaction' as defined in section 43(5) of the Act. All the
> contentions of the Ld. CIT(DR) have already been met in our submission dated
> 17.06.2015.

> The relevant provisions of section 43(5) which defines the term "speculative
> transaction" reads as under: .. (5) "speculative transaction" meansa
> transaction in which a contract for the purchase or sale 0/ any commodity.
> including stocks and shares, is periodically or ultimately settled otherwise
> than by the actual delivery or transfer of the commodity or scrips: Provided
> that for the purposes of this clause-

(a) a contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise entered into by a
person in the course of his manufacturing or merchanting business to guard
against loss through future price fluctuations in  49 ITA No.882/D/2014
Asstt.Year: 2009-10 respect 0/ his contracts for actual delivery of goods
manufactured by him or merchandise sold by him; or

(b) a contract in respect of stocks and shares entered into by a dealer or
investor therein to guard against loss in his holdings of stocks and shares
through price fluctuations: or

(c) a contract entered into by a member of a forward market or a stock
exchange in the course of any transaction in the nature of jobbing or
arbitrage to guard against loss which may arise in the ordinary course of his
business as such member; or

(d) an eligible transaction in respect of trading in derivatives referred to
in clause (ac) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
(42 of 1956) carried out in a recognised stock exchange:

shall not be deemed to be a speculative transaction. "[Emphasis supplied] The
facts of our case are:-

i. The assessee is an exporter of services for which it receives consideration
in US Dollars through direct remittance into its bank account.

ii. In India, US dollars is not money but commodity which can be sold or
bought in Indian rupees, which is the only legal tender in India.

iii. The rate of US Dollars fluctuates against the INR. In order to protect
its business against the fluctuations in US Dollars vis-a- vis INR, the
assessee hedges its foreign currency export receivables and forecasted sales
transactions by entering into FCs with its Bank.

IV. The assessee accounts for the FCs based upon a consistently followed
accounting policy as stated in its audited financial statements (Pg 1 of
Corporate Tax Submission dated 17.06.2015).

V. FCs were taken from the authorized dealer Bank in terms of the FEMA
regulations notified by the RBI. The RBI regulations (The Foreign Exchange
Management (Foreign exchange derivative contracts) Regulations, 2000 read
with, Schedule 1 of the Regulation-4-Ref. pgs., 728-733 of PE Vol.-IV clearly
provide that where the amount is not ascertainable the forward contract may be
taken on the basis reasonable estimate expected export receipts. The said
Schedule states that a forward forex contract can be booked by an authorized
dealer on the basis of reasonable estimate after verifying the documentary
evidence. The bank after satisfying itself in terms of the FE MA regulations
has issued the FCs. The facts are not in dispute at all. The matter has
already been  50 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 discussed at Point No.
7 of our submission dated 17.06.2015 before, your Honours. Thus, there is no
requirement for demonstrating rupee-wise and date-specific correlation of
export receivables for being not considered as a speculative, transaction. VI.
It is an undisputed fact that all FCs were ultimately settled by delivery of
contracted US dollars. The Ld. DRP has verified all the Foreign Inward
Remittance Certificates (FIRC) for receipt of US dollars against respective FC
and it is not disputed that all the FCs were ultimately settled through
delivery of contracted amount of US dollars (Para 3.7.1 of DRP order at Pg 65
of PB Vol.1). Since, all FCs are settled by actual delivery of the contracted
amount of US dollars, it is not a speculative transaction under section 43(5).
Since it is not a speculative transaction under section 43(5), there is no
question of applicability of proviso to section 43(5) of the Act.

Reliance in this regard is placed on the following: • Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Davenport & Co. P. Ltd. v. CIT, reported in (100 ITR 715), wherein
the Apex Court has held as under:

"For income-tax purposes speculative transaction means what the definition of
that expression in Expln. 2 says. Whether a transaction is speculative in the
general sense or under the Contract Act is not relevant for the purpose of
this Explanation. The definition of 'delivery' in S. 2(2) of the Sale of Goods
Act which has been held to include both actual and constructive or symbolical
delivery has no bearing on the definition of 'speculative transaction' in the
Explanation. A transaction which is otherwise speculative would not be a
speculative transaction within the meaning of Expln. 2 if actual delivery of
the commodity or the scrips has taken place; on the other hand, a transaction
which is not otherwise speculative in nature may yet be speculative according
to Expln. 2 if there is no actual delivery of the commodity or the scrips. The
Explanation does not invalidate speculative transactions which are otherwise
legal but gives a special meaning 10 that expression for purposes of income-
tax only. "[Emphasis supplied] • In the case of Commercial Motors Ltd. v. Dy.
CIT [2013J 218 taxmann.com 69(AII.)it was held that" .... the word
"periodically" or "ultimately" makes it clear that the provisions of section
43(5) are applicable where a part of the contract or the entire contract has
been settled otherwise than by actual delivery of the goods".

51 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 • Also in the case of R. Chinnaswami
Chettiar v. CIT [1974J 96 ITR 353 (Mad.) it was noted that "the emphasis in
section 43(5) of the Act is on the words. "periodically or ultimately settled
otherwise than by actual delivery". The word "settled" is Used in this part of
the section without any restriction as to whether if was before breach or
after breach. Whether the settlement was before or after breach of the
contract is immaterial if actual delivery of the goods is absent. In fact,
even in cases where the contract is highly speculative and amounts to a
wagering contract, it was settled by actual delivery, for the purpose of
section 43(5), it is not a speculative transaction. Thus the section dispenses
with all other formalities except that there must be actual delivery or
transfer of the commodity when the contract is settled. [Emphasis supplied]
vii. It has been clearly demonstrated beyond doubt that the FCs were taken for
hedging against foreign exchange fluctuations in the normal course of export
business as has already been held in favor of the assessee on similar facts in
the earlier year i.e. AY 2008-09 by the Hon'ble Delhi IT AT (Pg.365 of the PB
Vol. II).

2\. It is humbly submitted that the reliance placed by the Ld. CIT(DR) on the
decision in the case of BadridasGauridu (P) Ltd. v. CIT 134 Taxman 376
(Bombay), CIT v. Sooraj Mull Nagarmull 129 ITR 169 (Cal.), London Star Diamond
Co. Vs. DCIT 38 Taxmann.com 338 (Mum. Trib) and S.Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt.
Ltd. vs. Addt. CIT 35 taxmann.com 337 (Mumbai IT AT), is wholly misplaced as
these judgments are in context of cancellation of forward contracts and
consequential settlement of contract through payment of difference between the
value of foreign exchange on the contracted rate in INR and the prevailing
rate on the date of settlement. The Ld. CIT(DR) lost sight of the undisputed
facts of the case that none of the FCs of the assessee were cancelled and all
FCs were fully honored by delivery of contracted US dollars. This fact is
verified by the Ld. DRP in their order at Para 3.7.1 of DRP order at Pg 65 of
PB Vol.1.

3\. The reference by the Ld. CIT(DR) to the Explanation to section 37(1) of
the Act is misplaced and irrelevant. It is an undisputed fact that the FCs
were legally entered into by the assessee with Authorized Dealer Bank in terms
of the RBI regulations. It is also undisputed that no illegality is ever found
out or alleged by either the Bank or the RBI against the assessee in respect
of the FCs. Also, the RBI regulations permits taking FCs based on reasonable
52 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 estimate export receipts as discussed
above. It is undisputed that the value of FCs is more than the export sales
and export receivables. Thus, it cannot be said that entering into FCs is in
violation of the RBI guidelines and the allegation that it is hit by
explanation to section 37(1) is misplaced.

4\. Reliance on the CBDT Instruction No. 23/2010 dated 23-3-2010 is also
misplaced. The Ld. CIT(DR) fairly observed that MTM loss was held to be
allowable by the Special Bench of Hon'ble Mumbai ITA T in the case of DCIT vs.
Bank of Bahrain and Kuwait ([2010] 41 SOT 290) dated 13-08-2010. The
observations of the Ld. DR that the said decision is contrary to the CBDT
instruction is wholly misplaced as it is a settled principle that CBDT
instructions are not binding on the Appellate Authorities. Also, the said
decision of the Mumbai ITAT is later in time as against the issuance of the
CBDT instruction.

It is also worth mentioning that the said instruction was specifically
considered by the Hon'ble Delhi ITAT in the assessee's own case for AY 2008-09
and after considering it the Hon'ble Delhi IT AT decided the matter in favor
of the assessee and the matter stands covered in favor of the assessee in the
year under consideration.

5\. The Ld. DR also referred to a report of a Committee formed by RBI and SEBI
for analyzing the trade in currency forwards and future market and laying down
guidelines. It is mentioned that the said Committee submitted its report on
29-05-2008. However, how that would impact the instant transaction in FCs by
the assessee is not stated. The instant FC transaction is entered into in
terms of RBI Regulations (supra). Thus, this observations of the Ld. CIT(DR)
towards Committee report losing sight of the applicable RBI regulations is
wholly irrelevant.

6\. In view of the above, it is submitted that the MTM loss for AY 2009-10 is
allowable to the assessee based on the decision of the Hon'ble ITAT in
assessee's own case for AY 2008-09 as there is no change in the facts and
circumstances of the case. Further, to the extent of actual loss in the
subsequent year has been allowed on cash basis by the Ld. AO/DRP in the
Assessment Year 2010-11, which has been accepted by the Department. Thus, the
whole dispute is regarding timing of allowance.

Dated: 26.06.2015"

53 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

41\. At the very outset, we observe that undisputedly, the assessee company is
exclusively exporting engineering design services to its non-resident AE for
which it receives consideration in foreign exchange by way of direct
remittance to its bank in India. During the relevant previous year, the
assessee entered into 9 foreign exchange forward contracts on 6.8.2008 with au
authorised dealer of the bank in order to protect the value of anticipated
sale proceeds receivables from its AE in the form of foreign exchange i.e.
USD. The first of 9 contracts would mature on 3.4.2009, therefore contract
would start maturing every succceding month and the last contract would mature
on 4.12.2009. Undisputedly, the total value of forward contract was Rs. 19.50
crore and in accordance with its method of accounting, the assessee booked
loss of Rs.21.8 crore on the unexpired contracts as on 31.3.09 being the
difference in the INR value of USD as on 31.3.09 with the value of which
contracts were agreed to be settled.

42\. From the assessment order it is apparent that the AO had disallowed the
said claim of the assessee on the ground that the loss booked and claimed by
the assessee is a notional loss which is not allowable. Ld. Counsel has drawn
our attention towards Schedule XIII of the significant accounting policies of
the assessee and submitted that where the company enters into forward foreign
exchange contract with the bankers to mitigate the risk associated with the
foreign exchange fluctuation which is further associated with the accounts
receivables and amount forecasted sales transactions. It was also pointed out
54 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 that the fair value of forward
foreign exchange contract which have been taken to cover foreign exchange risk
in respect of probable forecasted transaction have a difference between the
contracted rate and forward rate at the balance sheet date are recognised in
the P&L account. He has drawn our attention towards assessee's paper book
Volume II pages 470 to 476 to support this fact. Ld. Counsel also pointed out
that in assessee's own case for AY 2008-09 ITA Delhi 'I' Bench order dated
8.3.2013 as in ITA No. 5895/D/2012 and allowed similar claim of the assessee
in regard to foreign exchange forward contract, therefore, he submitted that
the issue is squarely covered in favour of the assessee by the order of the
Tribunal in assessee's own case for the relevant assessment period.

43\. Ld. CIT DR elaborated his written synopsis/submissions as above and
submitted that as per CBDT Instruction No. 03/2010 dated 23.3.10 the AO
recording losses on account of currency derivatives and as per these said
instructions in respect of MTM losses debited to P&L account, AO instructed to
disallow the same while computing the taxable income. Ld. CIT DR further
submitted that as per said instructions in respect of actual crystallized
loss, the AO is instructed to verify whether the losses are on account of
speculative transaction as specified u/s 43(5) of the Act and to decide in
accordance with them. Therefore, above instructions render claim of deduction
for mark to market losses provided for in the books in respect of open
contracts untenable. Ld. CIT DR also contended that the claim of national loss
is not allowable and it  55 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 is also
relevant to examine that whether at the time of booking loss, the contract was
completed and performed by way of actual physical delivery of foreign
exchange, otherwise the same has to be treated as speculative transaction and
notional loss thereon cannot be claimed as allowable.

44\. Ld. CIT DR fairly submitted that in the DCIT vs Bank of Bahrain and
Kuwait (supra), Special Bench of ITAT while holding the MTM losses in respect
of foreign exchange contracts debited to P&L account has held as allowable
with certain observation but this creates a situation where on the other hand
special bench decision allows MTM loss while on the other hand CBDT
instructions mandates disallowance. It was also contended on behalf of the
revenue that the instructions from CBDT (supra) was either not pointed out to
the special bench or was subsequent to this order and the question in the said
case was whether MTM loss was a real loss or a notional loss and the issue of
speculation u/s 43(5) was not an issue before the Special Bench, therefore,
the same was not considered. Ld. CIT DR further contended that in this
background of aforesaid facts and issues before the Special Bench, the Bench
of ratio of the Special Bench order for claiming allowability of MTM losses
despite the instructions to the contrary by the CBDT is not available due to
the fact that the assessee failed to discharge its onus on giving real time
data regarding its claim, specially to demonstrate that the contracts were
finalised and performed by way of actual physical delivery of foreign exchange
resulting into booked/claimed losses therefrom. Ld. CIT DR finally prayed that
the issue  56 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 is not covered in favour
of the assessee and this issue calls for detailed adjudication in the light of
CBDT Circular No. 03/2010 (supra) and other relevant provisions of the Act.

45\. Ld. Counsel of the assessee also placed written rejoinder to the written
synopsis of the ld. CIT DR on 29.6.15 as reproduced hereinabove. Ld. Counsel
submitted that the contention of the ld. CIT DR emphasising that the assessee
fails to satisfy any of the clauses of the proviso to section 43(5) of the
Act, therefore, mark to market losses on forward contracts are not allowable
being speculative losses and this contention is misconceived. Ld. Counsel
further pointed out that as per relevant provisions of section 43(5) which
defines the term speculative transaction, means transaction in which a
contract for the purchase or sale of any commodity including stocks and shares
periodically or ultimately settled otherwise than by actual delivery or
transfer of the commodity or scrips. Ld. Counsel summarising his main argument
also contended that the assessee is an exporter of services for which it
receives consideration in USD through direct remittance into its bank
accounts. In India USD is not a money but commodity which can be sold or
bought in Indian rupee and the rate of USD fluctuations against INR,
therefore, in order to protect its business losses against fluctuations in USD
vis-a-vis INR, the assessee has as its foreign currency receivable and
forecasted sales transaction by entering into forward contracts with its
banks. Ld. Counsel pointed out that the assessee accounts for forward contract
based upon a consistently followed accounting policy as stated in its  57 ITA
No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 audited financial statement and forward
contracts were undertaken from the authorised dealer bank in terms of FEMA
regulations notified by the RBI and as per RBI regulations where the amount is
not ascertainable, the forward contract may be taken on the basis of
reasonable estimates expected export receipts.

46\. Ld. Counsel has further drawn our attention towards order of ld. DRP and
submitted that it is undisputed fact that all forward contracts were
ultimately settled by delivery of contracted USD and this fact was verified by
the DRP, therefore, the same cannot be terms as speculative transaction u/s
43(5) of the Act and therefore, there is no question of applicability of
proviso to section 43(5). Ld. Counsel further pointed out that case laws
relied by ld. CIT DR are in the context of cancellation of forward contracts
and settlement of contract through payment of difference between the value of
foreign exchange in contract rate in INR and prevailing rate on the date of
settlement. Ld. Counsel further contended that reliance placed by the ld. CIT
DR on these judgements is wholly misplaced perhaps he lost sight of the
undisputed fact that none of the forward contracts of the assessee were
cancelled and all forward contracts were fully honoured by delivery of
contracted USD. This fact was also verified by the ld. DRP in their order at
page 3.7.1 at page 65 of paper book volume I of the assessee. Ld. Counsel also
contended that CBDT instruction dated 23.3.2010 (supra) are not binding on the
appellate authorities and the decision of Special Bench Mumbai in the case of
DCIT vs Bank of Bahrain and Kuwait (supra) dated 13.8.2010 was passed in later
time against the issuance of CBDT  58 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10
instruction. Lastly, ld. Counsel vehemently contended that the revenue is
harping on the baseless and incorrect propositions which have been settled by
the ITAT Delhi in assessee's own case for AY 2008-09 on the similar set of
facts and circumstances and hence the issue is squarely covered in favour of
the assessee by this order of the Tribunal.

47\. At the very outset, we respectfully take cognizance of decision of ITAT
'I' Bench in assessee's own case for AY 2008-09 (supra) wherein the issue of
mark to market losses has been decided in favour of the assessee with
following observations:-

> "8. Coming to the corporate additions i.e. disallowance of loos, it clearly
> emerges from the record that the assessee in respect of foreign exchange
> realization follows mercantile system of accounting and not cash system of
> accounting. The loss has been incurred for hedging of foreign currency
> fluctuation involved in sales invoices on the basis of forward contracts,
> which is a business decision to safeguard its interest. The loss has been
> incurred on the basis of scientific method in the ordinary course of
> business. The loss being based on a scientific method in the ordinary course
> of business. The loss being based on a scientific method, on the basis of
> contractual liability with banks and on mercantile system has to be allowed
> to the assessee following Hon'ble Supreme Court judgment in the Case of
> Woodward Governor India P. Ltd. 312 ITR 254. Our view is further fortified
> by the fact that DRP in its own order in subsequent year has itself held
> that the issue about the loss on mercantile system is pending dispute in
> A.Y. 2008-09. Therefore, the allowability of the loss on actual payment in
> A. Y. 2009-10 has been made subject to the allowability of the loss for A.Y.

2008- 09. This stand of the DRP itself negates the observations of assessing
officer that it is a notional loss and establishes that it is a business loss
incurred by the assessee on mercantile system which method is consistently
followed by the assessee. Under these circumstances, we are inclined to allow
the foreign  59 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 exchange fluctuation
loss to assessee in this year. This ground of the assessee is allowed."

48\. In AY 2008-09, the claim of loss of Rs. 20,55,724 was claimed by the
assessee with following submission and contentions:-

> "5.1 During the previous year 2007-08, the appellant entered into foreign
> exchange forward contracts with banks in order to hedge foreign currency
> fluctuation and incurred a (net) foreign exchange loss of Rs. 20,55,724/- as
> a result of "marking to market" the forward contracts that were outstanding
> on March 31, 2008.

> 5.2. Ld. Counsel for the assessee Shri Sandeep Chaufla contends that:

> (i) There is no dispute about the incurrence of this loss as in the
> subsequent year the AO after due verification has allowed these losses;

> (ii) Similarly, there is no dispute on the method of accounting followed by
> the assessee is mercantile as the AO has recorded this fact in the
> assessment order.

> (iii) It is not disputed that these losses have been recognised by the
> assessee in accordance with applicable accounting standards/policies in this
> regard.

> (iv) The AO has raised only dispute that this loss is not allowable as
> deduction in the year of incurrence computed under mercantile system by
> following the accounting standards in this respect or at the time of
> realization of export proceeds on maturity of forward contracts."

49\. Undisputedly, the facts and circumstances of the present case are more or
less similar to the present AY 2009-10 and the assessee booked mart to market
loss of Rs.21.80 crore as on 31.3.09 being difference in the INR value of the
USD as on 31.3.09 and the value of which the hedging contract was agreed to be
settled. We further note that the assessee is following mercantile system of
account for recognition of this loss in its financial statements. When we see
the  60 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 order of the DRP para 3.7.1,
then it is amply clear that the ld. DRP has alleged that the forward contracts
are not fully supported by the underlying support invoice both in terms of the
amount as well as the tenure. DRP has drawn the table in this appeal and
thereafter noted that out of 9 forward contracts, the assessee has only used 4
forward contract fully and the assessee has not used these forward contracts
immediately but started using them against the sale invoice after the lapse of
time of few months. Ld. DRP further noticed that contract no. 1461 was used
for the first time on 31.10.08 for a nominal sum of USD 632 and thereafter in
November for USD 144247 and balance in December 2008 for USD 2755121. Thus, it
shows that there was no underlying asset for this contract from 6.8.2008 till
31.10.08. The entire forward contract could be utilised only by 31.12.08. For
the sake of clarity in our conclusion para 3.7.1 of the ld. DRP order is being
reproduced below:-

> "3.7.1 Without prejudice to the above, in case the higher appellant
> authorities' grants relief to the assessee on account of its claim discussed
> above, the relevant issue for consideration would be to what extent the
> claim made by the assessee is admissible? This for the reason that in this
> case, the FCs are not fully supported by the underlying export invoices both
> in terms of the amount as well as the tenor.

> Thus, an attempt was made by the Panel to ascertain as to what extent and
> how the assessee has used these FCs? The said position is given in the table
> below:

61

ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10 ST DETAIL OF OUTSTANDING FORWARD COVERS
AS ON 31 MARCH, 2009, FOR WHICH INVOICING DONE TILL MARCH, 2009 Contract
Contract Contract Invoice Invoice Invoice Underlying FIRC No. FIRC No. Date
Value Date Amt. Amt.- Assets as Date (US $) USD INR at 31.03.09 146164
6-Aug-08 2,900,000 Oct-08 632 31,640 YES 156473 2-Apr-09 Nov-08 144,247
7,208,024 YES Dec-08 2,755,121 131,942,759 YES 146166 6-Aug-08 2,900,000
Oct-08 (5,001) (250,495) YES 157124 4-May-09 Nov-08 33, 1,627 YES Dec-08
512,400 24,538,846 YES Jan-09 2,392,577 116,877,386 YES Mar-09 (9) (452) YES
146167 6-Aug-08 3,000,000 Jan-09 830,550 40,572,363 YES 157869 4-Jun-09 Feb-09
2,169,380 108,230,382 YES Mar-09 70 3,567 YES 146169 6-Aug-08 3,100,000
3,100,000 Jan-09 637 YES 158594 3-Jul-09 Feb-09 1,041,624 YES Mar-09 2,057,739
YES 146171 6-Aug-08 828,047 Mar-09 828,047 42,296,660 YES 159290 4-Aug-09 Sub-
Total 12,728,047 12,728,047 628,559,352 Grand Total 146171 6-Aug-08 2,271,953
Beyond NO 159290 4-Aug-09 31.3.09 146173 6-Aug-08 3,200,000 Beyond NO 159930
4-Sep-09 31.3.09 146174 6-Aug-08 3,300,000 Beyond NO 160558 1-Oct-09 31.3.09
146175 7-Aug-08 3,000,000 Beyond NO 161236 4-Nov-09 31.3.09 146176 7-Aug-08
3,100,000 Beyond NO 162068 4-Dec-09 31.3.09 Sub-Total 14,871,953 GRAND TOTAL
27,600,000 It can be seen that out of the 9 FCs, the assessee has used only 4
FCs fully. The assessee has not used these FCs immediately but started using
them against the sales invoices after a lapse of time of few months. To
elaborate it further, it is noticed that the contract no. 146164 was used for
the first time in 31st October 2008 for nominal sum of US$ 27,55,121. Thus, it
is evident that there was no underlying asset for this contract from 6.8.2008
till 31st October 2008. The entire FC could be utilized only by 31st December
2008.

Likewise the contract no. 146167 and 146169 taken on 6.8.2008 have been
started to be used by the assessee from  62 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year:
2009-10 January 2009 onwards. Thus, there was no underlying asset for these
contracts from 6.8.2008 till 31.12.2008.

Out of the firth FC bearing no. 146171 only a small part of US$8.28 (total
US$31 lakh) has been used by 31st March 2009 while the remaining 4FCs were not
utilized at all till 31.03.2009."

50\. There is no observation of the ld. DRP in para 3.7.1 which support the
contention of the assessee that all forward contracts were duly honoured by
delivery of contracts under USD. In this situation, in principle, we agree
that in view of the ratio laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Woodward Governer (312 ITR 254), while the assessee is following mercantile
system of accounting, the loss suffered by the assessee by fluctuation in the
foreign exchange as on the date of balance sheet is an item of expenditure u/s
37(1) of the Act. Under this proposition and dicta of Hon'ble apex court, and
facts emerging from the DRP order, we find it appropriate that the issue
requires detailed examination and verification and calculation on scientific
basis at the end of the AO/DRP in the light of relevant proposition and
provisions of the Act. Therefore, relying on the said propositions and
following the judgement of Hon'ble apex court in the case of Woodward Governor
(312 ITR 254), we restore this issue to the file of AO/DRP for a fresh
adjudication after factual analysis and examination of the impugned
transactions after affording due opportunity of hearing for the assessee and
without being prejudiced by the earlier orders.

63 ITA No.882/D/2014 Asstt.Year: 2009-10

51\. Accordingly, ground no. 5 to 5.4 of the assessee are allowed for
statistical purposes in the manner as indicated above. Ground no. 6 being
consequential and ground no. 7 being premature are dismissed.

52\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed on transfer
pricing issue and partly allowed for statistical purposes on the corporate
ground of mark to market losses.

Order pronounced in the open court on 14.10.2015.

    
    
               Sd/-                                                Sd/-
    
    ( S.V. MEHROTRA )                                  ( CHANDRAMOHAN GARG)
    ACCOUNTANT MEMBER                                      JUDICIAL MEMBER
    
    DT. 14th OCTOBER 2015
    'GS'
    
    Copy forwarded to:-
    
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   CIT(A)
          4.   CIT 5. DR
    
                                                      By Order
    
    
                                                      Asstt. Registrar
    
    
    
    
                                                64
     

