

Intellectual Property Appellate Board

Lark Laboratories Limited vs Nabros Pharma Pvt. Ltd. on 19 March, 2008

Bench: Z Negi, S O Rahaman

ORDER Syed Obaidur Rahaman, Technical Member

1\. This is an application for removal of trade mark from the Register or
rectification of the Register under Section 45, 57 and 125 of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999. The trade mark 'DOLAREN' under No. 810263 in class 5 registered in
the name of M/s Nabros Pharma Private Limited. The entry in the Register in
respect of the above mentioned trade mark may be removed or cancelled.

2\. The facts of the case is that the applicant is engaged in the business of
manufacturing and selling of medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations for
more than two decades. In the year 1980 the applicant adopted a fanciful and
inherently distinctive trade mark consisting of the work 'DOLAR' in respect of
the aforesaid goods and after obtaining necessary drug licence from competent
drug authorities, started using the said trade mark 'DOLAR' in respect of
cough syrup in the year 1981. The trade mark 'DOLAR' in respect of medicinal
preparations, by virtue of long, continuous, extensive and exclusive user of
the last more than twenty five years, has become distinctive and the same is
also associated exclusively with the name of the applicants. The applicant is
the registered proprietor of the trade mark 'DOLAR' under No. 439950 in class
5 in respect of medicinal preparations. The said trade mark is valid,
subsisting and in force till date. The applicant claims himself to be the sole
and exclusive proprietor of the trade mark 'DOLAR' in respect of the medicinal
preparations under the common law by virtue of prior, long, extensive,
exclusive and uninterrupted user and under the statute by the virtue of
registration. The medicinal preparations of the applicant under the trade mark
'DOLAR' are very popular amongst the doctors, patients and medical fraternity
at large by virtue of the exact composition, quality and effective control
regarding the treatment of related ailments and as such, the trade mark has
earned a unique goodwill and reputation associated exclusively with the name
of the applicants.

3\. It is the case of the applicant that the goods of the applicant under the
trade mark 'DOLAR' have been sold practically throughout the Republic of
India. The sale of the applicant's aforesaid goods under the trade mark
'DOLAR' are very extensive and runs in to several lakhs of rupees. The
applicant is carrying on extensive sales promotion of its trade mark 'DOLAR'
through various dealers schemes, discount schemes, free samples schemes etc.
and a huge amount has been spent on the sales promotion by the applicant. Due
to excellent quality of the medicines sold by the applicant's goods under its
trade mark 'DOLLAR' coupled with its aforesaid extensive sales promotion, the
trade mark 'DOLAR' has become a very reputed mark and is associated
exclusively with the name of the applicant. By virtue of the continuous and
extensive user coupled with huge advertisement and publicity campaigns, the
trade mark 'DOLAR' of the applicant in respect of its aforesaid goods has
become a 'well-known' mark and has earned a commanding reputation and goodwill
in the pharmaceutical industry on a national scale. The use of the trade mark
'DOLAR' and/or any other similar/deceptively similar trade mark in respect of
medicinal preparations is bound to cause confusion and deception amongst the
doctors, patients and medical fraternity as the same shall amount to unfair
trade practice, dilution and infringement of the applicant's proprietary
rights with respect to its prior registered and established trade mark
'DOLAR'.

4\. The respondent/registered proprietor claims himself to be the manufacturer
and merchants of medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations and has obtained
registration in respect of trade mark 'DOLAREN' in respect of
identical/similar goods under No. 810263 in class 5 dated 15.07.1998, the
subject matter of the present rectification. The respondent/registered
proprietor has suppressed materials and relevant facts from the Registrar of
Trade Marks and by making false claim of proprietorship obtained the
registration of the impugned mark. The respondents concealed the fact that the
Applicant is the prior user and registered proprietor of the trade mark
'DOLAR' for the last 25 years in respect of the identical goods. The impugned
trade mark 'DOLAREN' fraudulently adopted by the respondents is
similar/deceptively similar to the prior adopted and used, reputed, registered
and established trade mark 'DOLAR' of the applicant. Further the goods
involved herein are also identical i.e. medicinal preparations likely to be
sold in the same shop, over the same counter, to the same class of purchaser.
Therefore, on seeing/buying the goods of the respondent branded under their
registered trade mark 'DOLAREN', the purchasing public would assume as if the
impugned goods of the respondents are also coming from the applicant's
manufacture and/or that the respondent is a sister concern/branch of the
applicant's firm, thus, there is every likelihood of confusion and deception
amongst the trade channels as well as the purchasing public. Therefore, the
continuity of the registration of the impugned mark is hit by provisions of
Section 9 and 11 of the Act. The registered trade mark is not distinctive of
the registered proprietor's goods. As the impugned mark of the respondent is
similar/deceptively similar, to the prior adopted, prior used, registered and
established trade mark "DOLAR' of the applicant in respect of identical goods,
therefore, the same is not capable of distinguishing its goods from those of
the applicant's. Thus the impugned mark was not distinctive or capable of
being distinctive as on the date of its registration. Thus, the continuity of
the registration of the impugned mark is hit by the provisions of Section 9 of
the Act. If the registration of the impugned mark 'DOLAREN' under the
aforesaid number is allowed to be continued in the name of the registered
proprietor in the Register, the same shall lead and facilitate passing of the
goods of the registered proprietor as the goods of the applicant. The
registered proprietor has no justification for the adoption of the impugned
mark 'DOLARNEN'. The registered proprietor has adopted and fraudulently got
the trade mark 'DOLAREN' registered with ulterior motives and dishonest
intentions to trade upon the established goodwill and reputation of the
applicant's prior adopted and prior used proprietary mark 'DOLAR' and to earn
undue profits in an illegal manner. The respondents are not the actual and
lawful owners and proprietors of their impugned mark 'DOLAREN' under Section
18 of the Act. Thus the respondents concealed the relevant facts before the
Registrar of Trade Marks and on the basis of false representation, obtained
the registration of the impugned mark. The impugned mark is of such nature
that it is bound to cause confusion and deception among the purchasing public
and hence the impugned mark ought to be rectified by the Registrar. The
registration of the impugned mark was made in the contravention of the
provisions of the Trade Marks Act and in particular the provisions contained
in Section 9, 11 and 18 of the Act and even today the impugned mark continues
to be in contravention of the provisions of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and
particularly the provisions contained in Sections 9, 11 and 18 of the Act. The
continuation of the registered trade mark 'DOLAREN' under No. 810263 in Class
5 in the name of the registered proprietor would affect the purity of the
Register. The entry relating to the impugned mark was made in the Register
without sufficient cause. The entry relating to the impugned mark wrongly
remains on the Register. The impugned mark is otherwise disentitled for
protection in court of law. In his discretion, the learned Registrar ought not
to have registered the impugned mark in the name of the registered proprietor.
The applicant is an aggrieved person within the meaning of the present
proceedings as the rights of the applicant with respect to its prior adopted
and prior used mark 'DOLAR' are being adversely affected by the registration
and continuation of the impugned mark in the Register as both the applicant as
well as the respondents are in the same trade and further the respondents have
started manufacturing and selling medicinal preparations under the impugned
mark 'DOLAREN'. Further, the respondents on the basis of their trade mark
'DOLAREN' have filed a civil suit for permanent injunction against the
applicants at the District Courts, Ahmedabad. Thus in view of the aforesaid
reasons, the applicants are the 'aggrieved persons' and have a locus standi to
file and institute the present proceedings for cancellation/removal of the
registered trade mark 'DOLAREN' in the name of the registered proprietor under
the aforesaid number. The balance of convenience also lies in favour of the
applicant and against the respondents. That the respondents have filed a civil
suit against the applicant at City Civil Courts, Ahmedabad, on the basis of
their aforesaid registered trade mark 'DOLAREN'. It is, therefore, prayed that
the impugned trade mark 'DOLAREN' under No. 810263 in Class 5 in the name of
the registered proprietor be rectified/removed/cancelled.

5\. In the counter statement filed by the respondent it is stated that the
respondent is a private limited company incorporated under the Companies Act,
1956 and the respondent is originally incorporated in the year 1983 in the
name of Nabros Pharma Limited, thereafter having passed the necessary
resolutions on 14.12.2004 to effect the change of name of Nabros Pharma Pvt.
Ltd. The respondent company is engaged in the business of manufacturing,
marketing, selling and exporting, medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations.
The product of the respondent is in the form of the tablet under the trade
mark with the artistic work in its copyright. The respondent coined the
trademark 'DOLAREN' and the copyright in the label of the medicines sold under
the trademark 'DOLAREN' in the year 1998. The said medicine under the trade
mark 'DOLAREN' is an anti-inflammatory medicine. The product of the respondent
has become very famous and has acquired the tremendous reputation amongst the
public for its excellent quality and in consequences thereof a very valuable
goodwill accumulated therein. To distinguish its product from the products of
other manufacturers, the respondents have adopted and using the trade mark
'DOLAREN' and also the copyright consisting in its artwork i.e. particular
style, get-up, layout, design of that of the hand of a man covered with a
glove knocks but and to show the pain disappears with the design of zig zag
and at the bottom of the packages of the respondent, the trade mark 'DOLAREN'
has been written and under it there has been a note write as KNOCKS OUT PAIN,
INFLAMATION AND FEVER the manner of writing the trade mark 'DOLAREN' on each
packages both in English and Russian language on the packages of the
respondent is being continuously used by the respondent since year 1998 in
respect of medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations uninterruptedly,
continuously, extensively and openly in many countries. The respondent is the
sole proprietor and enjoying the exclusive rights to use the said trade mark
DOLAREN and the copyright subsists in the artwork of its label and on the
packages under the provisions of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Copyright
Act, 1957. Because of the good quality and an attractive trade mark 'DOLAREN'
along with the copyright in the art work of its label and on packages in
respect of the said goods viz., tablet used in pain, inflammation and fever,
which is catchy and being used by the respondent since long, has captured very
good mark. The respondent submits that because of field activity, quality
products, wide network of the depot, dealers and stockiest and by spending
very huge amount and efforts in advertising, the respondent company have been
in a position to make known its products amongst the consumers, dealers and to
the general public under the said trade mark 'DOLAREN' along with the
Copyright in the artwork if its label and on packages which has become
prominent part of this field. The trade mark 'DOLAREN' has been coined by the
respondent and has been in continuous use since the year 1998. Therefore, the
question of unfair trade practice, dilution and infringement of the
appellant's property rights from the appellant's trademark 'DOLAR' does not
arise. The respondent is a renowned manufacturer of pharmaceutical products.
The details of export sales effected by the respondent are given below:

Financial year Export Turnover 1996-1997 3,17,65,560.00 1997-1998
12,41,45,964.00 1998-1999 7,98,56,552.00 1999-2000 8,54,39,505.00 2000-2001
17,98,27,181.00 2001-2002 10,90,54,902.00 2002-2003 13,30,67,385.00 2003-2004
4,59,52,009.00 2004-2005 9,46,36,707.00 2005-2006 28,56,24,330.00

6\. The present respondent has filed a civil suit for permanent injunction for
infringement of registered trademark and copyright before the City Civil Court
at Ahmedabad being Suit No. 1735 of 2006 against the present appellant. The
respondent submits that both the marks 'BOLAREN' of the present appellant and
'DOLAREN' of the present respondent are similar and on that basis the Hon'ble
Court of Ahmedabad has granted an injunction restraining the present appellant
from the use of impugned trademark vide order dated 31.08.2006. The present
suit is pending before the City Civil Court at Ahmedabad. The respondent
submits that this rectification is counterblast of the present appellant
against the present respondent and for that reason they have filed this
frivolous rectification against the respondent before the Appellate Board.

7\. The matter came up before the Circuit Bench at Ahmedabad on 21.02.2008.
Learned Counsel Shri R.K. Jain appeared on behalf of the applicant and Ms.
Sejal R. Shah learned Counsel appeared for the respondent.

8\. The learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that they are the prior
user and their mark is registered 25 years back in the year 1980 and since
then they are using the mark. The said trade mark has been duly renewed from
time to time and the same is valid, subsisting on the Register of Trade Marks.
The respondent has copied the applicant's mark and duplicating his mark and by
way of fraud the respondent obtained registration in the year 1998 after
writing letter. By virtue of this registration they are filing suit for
infringement against the original owner of the trade mark. The appellant are
prior adopter and using in the field of pharmaceutical, medicinal
preparations. So they have better right than the subsequent users. If you
compare between the two marks, the latter mark is deceptively similar to the
earlier mark. In view of this, within the meaning of Section 56, 57 of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999, the applicant is definitely an aggrieved person. So he
is entitled to file this rectification application.

9\. It is clear form the averment made in the counter statement by the
respondent in para 7 the present respondent has filed a civil suit for
permanent injunction for infringement of registered trade mark and copyright
before the City Civil Court at Ahmedabad being suit No. 1735 of 2006 against
the present applicant. The respondent submits that both the marks 'BOLAREN' of
the present appellant and 'DOLAREN' of the present respondent are similar.
Both belong to same trade. The petitioner cited case law in Jain Doors Pvt.
Ltd. v. Suresh Kumar Jain wherein it was held as follows:

18\. We have carefully considered the arguments of both the counsel. The main
issue which arises for consideration is whether the applicant is an aggrieved
persons. The applicant in this case is an aggrieved person for the reason that
the respondent had taken criminal action against the applicant. As per Section
56 of the Act for expunging or varying the entry wrongly made or remaining in
the Register the locus standi would be ascertained liberally since it would
not be against the interest of the person carrying on the same trade, but also
in the interest of the public to have such wrongful entry removed. In the
matter of Powell's Trade Mark 1894 (11) RPC 4, the House of Lords has defined
aggrieved person as "although they were no doubt inserted to prevent officious
interference by those who had no interest at all in the Register being
correct, and to exclude a mere common informer, it is undoubtedly of public
interest that they should not be unduly limited, in as much as it is public
mischief that there should remain upon the Register a mark which ought not to
be there, and by which many persons may be affected, who nevertheless would
not be willing to enter upon the risk and expenses of litigation.

Wherever it can be shown, as here that the applicant is in the same trade as
the person who has registered the trade mark and wherever the trade mark, if
remaining on the Register would or might limit the legal rights of the
applicant, so that by reason of the existence of the entry on the Register he
could not lawfully do that, which, but for the existence of the mark upon the
Register, he could lawfully do, it appears to me he has a locus standi to be
heard as person aggrieved.

Thus when the rights of the applicant is being interfered by the respondent as
the registered proprietor under the impugned mark, the applicant is construed
to be aggrieved person. From the above we are of the opinion that the
applicant is a person aggrieved.

The learned Counsel further relied on the following judgments:

(i) Syncom Formulations v. SAS Pharmaceuticals

(ii) 1996 PTC (16) Ciba Geigy Ltd., v. Crosslands Research Laboratories Ltd.

(iii) USV Limited v. IPCA Laboratories Limited

(iv) 2007 (35) PTC (Del) SSG Pharma Pvt. Ltd., v. Amar Nath

(v) 2002 (24) PTC 438 (Del) Vijay Grover v. Biocure Laboratories and Anr.

(vi) 1992-PTC-137 M.s Astra-IDL Limited v. M.s TTK Pharma Limited

(vii) Computer Sciences Corporation v. R. Thangaraj

(viii) 1998 PTC (18) Charak Pharmaceuticals v. Deepharma Ltd.

(ix) 1994-PTC-183 Brook Bond India Limited v. C. Patel & Co.

(x) Saroop Prakash Nayar v. Chesebrough Pond's Inc.

10\. The counsel for respondent No. 1 cited the order passed by the District &
Sessions Judge, Delhi in Lark Laboratories v. Nabros Pvt. Ltd., the operative
part of which is as follows:

It was a criminal case and in the background of the case the Hon'ble High
Court had appreciated the arguments that even in the goods of the accursed
were meant for export purposes only then also their seizure was necessary. The
application of the plaintiff is therefore dismissed.

His contention is that the applicant filed suit for injunction under Order 39
Rules 1 and 2 CPC filed by the plaintiff along with the suit wherein it has
been prayed that the defendant be restrained from manufacturing, selling,
offering for sale or otherwise dealing in medicinal and pharmaceutical
preparations under the Trade Mark 'DOLAREN' and/or any other
similar/deceptively similar trademark. Defendant be also restrained from
passing off their goods as the goods of the plaintiff. After hearing the
submissions of both the parties, the District and Sessions Judge, Delhi
dismissed the plaintiff's application. He submits that the mark of the
respondent is different from the appellant's mark and so there is no question
of confusion in the mark. Hence the rectification application shall be
dismissed.

11\. We have heard both parties and gone through the documents. It is an
admitted fact that the registration was obtained by the applicant in the year
1980. So they are the prior adopter and user of the mark 'DOLAR' in respect of
medicinal preparations. The respondent has copied the appellant's mark and
advertised his mark and encashing on the goodwill of the applicant's mark
which is existing in the market very long. The respondent obtained the
registration of the mark by adding the letters 'EN' to the applicant's mark
'DOLLAR' and using the same mark in the same field as medicinal preparation.
Both the medicinal preparations are used in different use.

12\. So there is likelihood of confusion and deception amongst the trade
channels and as well as the purchasing public. Also there is chance of adverse
effect if the medicines use if confused by the user. So we are of the view
that the registration of the impugned mark is hit by the provisions of Section
9, 11 and 18 of the Act. Hence we are of the view that the mark was registered
wrongly and the same cannot be allowed to continue in the Register of Trade
Marks.

13\. In view of the above, ORA 119/06/TM/AMD is allowed and the Registrar is
directed to remove the mark 'DOLAREN' under No. 810263 from the Register of
Trade Marks. However, there will be no order as to costs.

