

Supreme Court of India

Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd vs State Of West Bengal & Anr on 11
November, 1974

Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 266, 1975 SCR (2) 674

Author: A Ray

Bench: Ray, A.N. (Cj)

    
    
               PETITIONER:
    ERUSIAN EQUIPMENT & CHEMICALS LTD.
    
    	Vs.
    
    RESPONDENT:
    STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ANR.
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT11/11/1974
    
    BENCH:
    RAY, A.N. (CJ)
    BENCH:
    RAY, A.N. (CJ)
    MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
    UNTWALIA, N.L.
    
    CITATION:
     1975 AIR  266		  1975 SCR  (2) 674
     1975 SCC  (1)	70
     CITATOR INFO :
     RF	    1977 SC1496	 (20)
     R	    1978 SC 930	 (15,16,17,18)
     R	    1979 SC1628	 (12,21)
     RF	    1987 SC1086	 (28)
    
    
    ACT:
    Constitution  of  India,  1950,	 Art.  14-Black	 listing  of
    contractors without opportunity to show cause-Validity.
    
    
    
    HEADNOTE:
    Certain	 persons engaged in the business of purchase  export
    of  Cinchona pro ducts, and others who were on the  approved
    list  of the Director General, Supplies and Disposals,	were
    put on the black list by the Government, because, Government
    had   information   that  they	were   indulging   in	some
    malpractices.
    On the question whether they were entitled to a notice to be
    heard, before they were put on the black list,
    HELD : (1) Under Art. 298 of the Constitution the  executive
    power  of  the	Union  and the State  shall  extend  to	 the
    carrying on of any trade and to the acquisition, holding and
    disposal  of  property and the making of contracts  for	 any
    purpose.   The	State  can carry on  executive	function  by
    making a law or without making a law.  The exercise of	such
    powers	and  functions in trade by the State is	 subject  to
    Part III of the Constitution.  Article 14 speaks of equality
    before	the law and equal protection of the laws.   Equality
    of opportunity applies to matters of public contracts.	 The
    State need not enter into any contract with anyone but if it
    does,  it  must	 do so	fairly	without	 discrimination	 and
    without	 unfair	 procedure.  No one has any right  to  enter
    into  a	 contract  with	 the  Governor	quotations  for	 the
    purchase of goods.  This privilege arises because it is	 the
    Government  which  is  trading	With  the  public,  and	 the
    democratic  form of Government demands equality and  absence
    of  arbitrariness and discrimination in	 such  transactions.
    The activities of the Government have a public element	and,
    therefore,  there should be fairness and equality.  [677C-E,
    G; 678D-E]
    (2) A body maybe under a duty to give fair consideration  to
    the  facts  and to consider the representation	but  not  to
    disclose   details   of	 information  in   its	 possession.
    Sometimes  the	duty  to act fairly can	 also  be  sustained
    without providing opportunity for an oral hearing.  It	will
    depend	upon  the nature of the interest affected,  and	 the
    circumstances in which the power is exercised and the nature
    of sanctions involved therein. [678H-679B]
    (3)  Exclusion of 'a member of the public from dealing	with
    a  State in sales transactions has the effect of  preventing
    him  from  purchasing and doing a lawful trade in  goods  by
    discriminating	against him in favour of other people.	 The
    State  can impose reasonable conditions regarding  rejection
    and  acceptance of bids or qualifications of bidders.	Just
    as  an	exclusion of the lowest tender	will  be  arbitrary,
    similarly  exclusion  of a person. who	offers	the  highest
    price from participating in a public auction would also have
    the same aspect of arbitrariness. [678F-G]
    (4)  Black  listing  has the effect of preventing  a  person
    from  the  privilege and advantage of entering	into  lawful
    relationship  with the Government for purposes of  gain.   A
    person	who is on the approved list is unable to enter	into
    advantageous  relations With the Government because  of	 the
    order  of black listing. A person who has been dealing	with
    the  Government	 in  the  matter of  sale  and	purchase  of
    materials  ha& a legitimate interest or expectation.   Black
    listing tarnishes one's reputation and reputation is a	part
    of  person's  character and personality.  The  fact  that  a
    disability  is	created	 by  the  order	 of  black   listing
    indicates  that	 the  relevant	authority  is  to  have	  an
    objective  satisfaction.  Fundamentals of fair play  require
    that the person concerned should be given an opportunity  to
    represent  his	case  before be is put on  the	black  list.
    [678EF; 679B-C]
    			    675
    
    
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Writ Petitions Nos. 34 of 1974 and 959 of 1973.

Petition under Art. 32 of the Constitution of India and Civil Appeal No. 318
of 1974.

From the judgment and order dated the 15th September 1973 of the Bombay High
Court in Appeal No. 38 of 1973. D. C. Singhania, C. N. Murthy, (In W.P. No.
34/74), Madan Bhatia and Shiv Khorana, (In W.P. No. 959/73) and M. K. Garg,
for the petitioners (In W.P. No. 34/74 & 959/73). B. Sen, D. N. Mukherjee,
Sukumar Basu and G. S. Chatterjee, for the respondents (In W.P. No. 34/74 and
959/73).

L. N. Sinha, Solicitor General of India, P. P. Rao and M. N. Shroff, for the
appellant (In C.A. No. 318/74). Haroon S. Kably and S. Markandeya, for the
respondents (In C.A. No. 318/74).

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by RAY, C.J.-The two Writ Petitions
and the Civil Appeal raise the question as to whether a person who is put on
the black list by the State Government is entitled to a notice to be heard
before the name is put on the black list. Sale of Cinchona is held by the
State Government at meetings of the Sales Committee. Sealed quotations are
invited for intending buyers. The State maintains a list of buyers or bidders.
The State has the right to reject a bid at an auction.

The petitioners in the Writ Petitions were engaged in the business of purchase
and export of Cinchona products between the years 1966 and 1971. They
submitted tender for purchase of Cinchona. Their tender was accepted. They
entered into contracts with the State Government during those years for
purchase of Cinchona for large sums of money. The petitioners submitted tender
once on 15th February, 1973 and again on 4 December, 1973. The petitioners
allege that since the month of December, 1970 all offers of the petitioners
were rejected though in most cases their offer was the highest. The
petitioners contend that there is discrimination and lack of fair play at the
sale. The petitioners submit that they are entitled to receive the same
treatment and to be given the same chance as anybody else for the purchase of
Cinchona. The petitioners are interested in the purchase of Cinchona in course
of their trade and business.

The respondent State alleges that the petitioners were guilty of
misdeclaration of goods in their export transactions. The Sales Committee of
the State learnt from a secret letter from the Collector of Customs, Calcutta
that the firm of the petitioners was involved in 676 malpractices, and their
case was under investigation. The Sales Committee at a meeting on 21 January,
1971 resolved not to deal with the firm of the petitioners till the firm was
cleared of charges of malpractices. It is because of this resolution that the
tender of the petitioners was not accepted. The petitioners according to the
respondent came to know this resolution at the meeting of the Sales Committee
on 4 December, 1973. The State could not however produce the original
resolution in this Court. It may be mentioned here that the petitioners have
challenged the charges and cases under the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act in
the High Court at Calcutta in Writ Petition No. 959 of 1973 which is pending.

The respondent in Civil Appeal No. 318 of 1974 was on the, approved list of
the Director General, Supplies and Disposals since the year 1942. The last
renewal of registration of the respondent was on 5 June, 1963 for three years.
Certain reports were received against the respondent regarding shortage of
timber. The Special Police Establishment took charge of account books of the
respondent in the month of August, 1964. A Departmental enquiry was made
against the store-keeper and the Store-holder in the Bombay Telephone
Workshop. Those two employees were suspended in the month of December, 1964.
On 4 December, 1965 the department put the name of the respondent on the black
list. The employees of the Government who had been suspended in the year 1964
were dismissed on 1 June, 1967. In the month of January, 1968 the respondent
applied to the Court for return of the account books which had been taken by
the Special Police Establishment. In the month of March, 1968 the account
books were ordered to be returned. The respondent filed Writ Petition in the
High Court at Bombay on 20 January, 1969. On 12 January, 1973 the High Court
allowed the writ petition of the respondent setting aside the order whereby
the respondent was blacklisted. The State filed an appeal. The High Court of
Bombay dismissed the appeal. The present appeal is against that judgment. The
employees who had been dismissed by the State also applied to the High Court
for setting aside their dismissal. The High Court accepted the prayer of the
employees by an order dated 3 August, 1972.

In Writ Petitions counsel for the State submitted that the petitioner was not
entitled to any order of mandamus inasmuch as the sales were contractual. It
was said that the petitioner was not entitled as of right to acceptance of
tender. It was also said that the attitude of the State was not discriminatory
against the petitioner but that the State wanted that the pending proceedings
against the petitioner for alleged violation of Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act should be adjudicated first and thereafter the State would deal with the
petitioner.

677

The Solicitor General on behalf of the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 318 of
1974 made these submissions. The Government could choose any person for
entering into a contract. Further, the State could insist on dealing with
persons in whom the State had trust for integrity. The sales were not under a
statute. Black-listing is an inter- nal and confidential step. Rights under
Articles 14, 19 and 21 do not extend to the compelling of any third party
including the Government to negotiate or enter into a contract. The duty to
act fairly may include in many cases duty to act judicially and those would be
cases where there is existing vested rights. The duty to act fairly would not
always mean a duty to hear the party affected. Whereas public blacklisting is
not confidential, departmental black- listing will be a confidential matter.
If natural justice does not come into play in rejecting a bid, natural justice
does not operate at the time of entering into contract. Under Article 298 of
the Constitution the Executive power of the Union and the State shall extend
to the carrying on of any trade and to the acquisition, holding and disposal
of property and the making of contracts for any purpose. The State can carry
on executive function by making a law or without making a law. The exercise of
such powers and functions in trade by the State is subject to Part III of the
Constitution. Article 14 speaks of equality before the law and equal,
protection of the laws. Equality of opportunity should apply to matters of
public contracts. The State has the right to trade. The State has there the
duty to observe equality. An ordinary individual can choose not to deal with
any person. The Government cannot choose to exclude persons by discrimination.
The order of black- listing, has the effect of depriving a person of equality
of opportunity in the matter of public contract. A person who is on the
approved list is unable to enter into advantageous relations with the
Government because of the order of black- listing. A person who has been
dealing with the Government in the matter of sale and purchase of materials
has a legitimate interest or expectation. When the State acts to the prejudice
of a person it has to be supported by legality.

But for the order of blacklisting, the petitioner would have been entitled to
participate in the purchase of cinchona. Similarly the respondent in the
appeal would also have been entitled but for the order of blacklisting to
tender competitive rates.

The State can enter into contract with any person it chooses. No person has a
fundamental right to insist that the Government must enter into a contract
with him. A citizen has a right to earn livelihood and to pursue any trade. A
citizen has a right to claim equal treatment to enter into a contract which
may be proper, necessary and essential to his lawful calling.

The blacklisting order does not pertain to any particular contract. The
blacklisting order involves civil consequences. It casts a slur. It creates a
barrier between the persons blacklisted and the Government in the matter of
transactions. The blacklists are "instruments of coercion".

678

In passing an order of blacklisting the Government department acts under what
is described as a standardised Code. This is a Code for internal instruction.
The Government departments make regular purchases. They maintain list of
approved suppliers after takings into account the financial standard of the
firm, their capacity and their past performance. The removal from the list is
made for various reasons. The grounds on which blacklisting may be ordered are
if the proprietor of the firm is convicted by court of law or security
considerations so warrant or if there is strong justification for believing
that the proprietor or employee of the firm, has been guilty of malpractices
such as bribery, corruption, fraud. or if the firm continuously refuses to
return Government dues or if the firm employs a Government servant, dismissed
or removed on account of corruption in a position where he could corrupt
Government servant. The petitioner was blacklisted on the ground of
justification for believing that the firm has been guilty of malpractices such
as bribery, corruption, fraud. The petitioners were blacklisted on the ground
that there were proceedings pending against the petitioners for alleged
violation of provisions under the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act. The
Government is a government of laws and not of men. It is true that neither the
petitioner nor the respondent has any right to enter into a contract but they
are entitled to equal treatment with others who offer tender or quotations for
the purchase of the goods. This privilege arises because it is the Government
which is trading with the public and the democratic form of Government demands
equality and absence of arbitrariness and discrimination in such transactions.
Hohfeld treats privileges as a form of liberty as opposed to a duty. The
activities of the Government have a public element and, therefore, there
should be fairness and equality. The State need not enter into any contract
with any one but 'if it does so, it must do as fairly without discrimination
and without unfair procedure. Reputation is a part of person's character and
personality. Blacklisting tarnishes one's reputation. Exclusion of. a member
of the public from dealing with a State in sales transactions has the effect
of preventing him from purchasing and doing a lawful trade in the goods by
discriminating against him in favour of other people. The State can impose
reasonable conditions regarding rejection and acceptance of bids or
qualifications of bidders. Just as exclusion of the lowest tender will be
arbitrary similarly exclusion of a person who offers the highest price from
participating at a public auction would also have, the same aspect of
arbitrariness.

Where the State is dealing with individuals in transactions of sales and
purchase of goods, the two important factors are that an individual is
entitled to trade with the Government and an individual is entitled to a fair
and equal treatment with others. A duty to act fairly can be interpreted as
meaning a duty to observe certain aspects of rules of natural justice. A body
may 'be under a duty to 679 give fair consideration to the facts and to
consider the representations but not to disclose to those persons details of
information in its possession. Sometimes duty to act fairly can also be
sustained without providing opportunity for an oral hearing. It win depend
upon the nature of the interest to be affected, the circumstances in which a
power is exercised the nature of sanctions involved therein. Blacklisting has
the effect of preventing a person from the privilege and advantage of entering
into lawful relationship with the Government for purposes of gains. The fact
that a disability is created by the order of blacklisting indicates that the
relevant authority is to have an objective satisfaction. Fundamentals of fair
play require that the person concerned should be given an opportunity to
represent.his case before he is put on the blacklist. With regard to the case
of the petitioners, it is made clear that the authorities will give an
opportunity to the petitioners to represent their case, and the authorities
will hear the petitioners as to whether their name should be put on the
blacklist or not. This is made clear that the decision on this question will
not have any effect on the proceedings pending in Calcutta High Court where
the peti- tioner has challenged the adjudication proceedings under the Foreign
Exchange Regulations Act. Any decision of the authorities on the blacklisting
will have no effect on the correctness of any of the facts involved in those
proceedings.

For these reasons, the petitioners succeed. The appeal is dismissed. The
parties will pay and bear their own costs.

    
    
    V.P.S.			       Appeal dismissed.
    680
    
    
    
    

