

Delhi High Court

Kalindi Medicure Pvt. Ltd. vs Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd. And ... on 4 October,
2006

Equivalent citations: 136 (2007) DLT 200, 2007 (34) PTC 18 Del

Author: P Nandrajog

Bench: P Nandrajog

JUDGMENT Pradeep Nandrajog, J.

1\. On 6.9.2006 while issuing summons in the suit, taking cognizance of IA.
No. 9988/06 filed by the plaintiff under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 CPC, following
ex-parte ad-interim order was passed:

1\. Notice returnable for 5th October, 2006.

2\. Plaintiff is the registered proprietor of the trademark 'LOPRIN' in
respect of pharmaceutical products. Registration in favor of the plaintiff is
since 20th September, 2000 but goods under the said trade name/mark are stated
to be marketed by the plaintiff since the year 1994.

3\. Sales effective from the year 2000 onwards have been stated in para 7 of
the application. The sales exceed Rs. 295 lacs per annum for each of the six
years.

4\. Defendants have adopted the word/mark 'LOPARIN'.

5\. Objection taken by the plaintiff is to the visual and phonetic similarity
in the trademark/name adopted by the defendants.

6\. A perusal of the trademark/name adopted by the defendants shows that they
have inserted the letter 'A' midway between the trademark of the plaintiff
i.e. letter 'A' finds itself between the letters 'LOP' and 'RIN'.

7\. Prima facie it is a case of phonetic as well as visual similarity, tested
on the principle of a common man with the usual imperfect memory, seeing the
goods of the defendants and from his memory recollecting those of the
plaintiff and getting misled.

8\. I am satisfied that delay occasioned by putting the defendants to prior
notice is likely to defeat the purpose of the injunction.

9\. Goods are pharmaceutical goods and a stricter standard have to be applied.

10\. However, lest business of the defendants be affected all of a sudden, and
noting that as per case pleaded by the plaintiff, it learnt about the
offending activity of the defendants in May, 2006, I direct that after 30 days
from today, defendants or any person acting under the authority of the
defendants would not sell pharmaceutical preparations under the trademark
'LOPARAIN' or under any other mark which is deceptively similar to that of the
plaintiff i.e a mark which uses the letters 'LOP' or 'RIN'.

11\. 30 days time is being granted to the defendants to effect the changeover.

12\. Compliance with Order 39 Rule 3 CPC be made within three days.

2\. IA. No. 10893/06 has been filed by the defendant invoking Order 39 Rule 4
CPC praying that the ex-parte injunction be vacated.

3\. Case of the plaintiff is that 'MM Labs' was a unit of Uni-Distributors
Pvt. Ltd. which was manufacturing and selling pharmaceuticals products since
1994. Amongst others, since 1994 said unit was manufacturing and selling an
analgesic drug marketed under the trade name LOPRIN, a coined word derived
from 'low dose of aspirin', drug being for combating cardiological problems
such as prevention of strokes, recurring angina, venous, thrombosis and
embolism. Since 1999 it was manufacturing and selling 'LOPRIN-DS'.
Registration of LOPRIN was obtained under the Trade & Merchandise Act, 1958 on
20.9.2000. That Unichem Laboratories Ltd. markets LOPRIN for the plaintiff.
That reputation and goodwill for LOPRIN can be gauged from the following:

    
    
      Year     Product Name     Promotional expenses     Value (Rs. in Lac)
    2000-01  LOPRIN             3988345     
             LOPRIN   DS        1484071                      424.15
    2001-02  LOPRIN             5113764
             LOPRIN   DS        2124547                      370.86
    2002-03  LOPRIN             4939050
             LOPRIN   DS        2124297                      305.39
    2003-04  LOPRIN             5175633 
             LOPRIN   DS        1871016                      286.15
    2004-05  LOPRIN             4980220
             LOPRIN   DS        1648062                      295.68
    2005-06  LOPRIN             5512460
             LOPRIN   DS        1769654                      322.07
    
     
    
    

4\. That by virtue of a Business Transfer Agreement dated 1.12.2003, Uni
Distributors Pvt. Ltd. sold business of it's unit 'M.M.Labs' to plaintiff and
hence proprietory right in the trade name LOPRIN and LOPRIN-DS vested in
plaintiff.

5\. That in May, 2006, plaintiff came across impugned product of the
defendants being marketed under the trade name 'LOPARIN'. That said act
constitutes a blatant and flagrant infringement of the plaintiff's registered
trade mark.

6\. In para 12 of the plaint, plaintiff has pleaded:

12\. It is submitted that the adoption by the Defendants of a virtually
identical mark LOPARIN, merely with the latter "A" added at in respect of
identical goods would lead to confusion and deception in the minds of the
consumers leading to passing off of the Defendants' goods as those of the
Plaintiff. It is further submitted that the adoption of the trademark LOPARIN
by the Defendants, which is visually, structurally and phonetically similar to
the Plaintiff's trademark LOPRIN, and its variants is dishonest and tentative.
The Defendants adoption of the impugned mark appears to be guided solely by
ulterior motives and the dishonest intent to misappropriate the goodwill and
exclusively enjoyed by the Plaintiff in respect of the trademark LOPRIN and to
pass off their goods as those of the Plaintiff. It is further submitted that
use of the trademark LOPARIN by the Defendants is an attempt to derive an
unfair advantage by creating an impression that their products have some
connection, association, affiliation or endorsement with the Plaintiff.

7\. defense set up in that suit suffers from gross and latches, disentitling
the plaintiff to any relief. That defendant No. 2 obtained permission from the
Government under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 to manufacture the drug
Loparin and sale commenced in October, 2005. Suit was filed after 10 months.
That the plaintiff had knowledge of said fact evidenced by the plaintiff
relying upon data-base published by ORG-IMS which reported about launch of
defendants drug in October, 2005. That the Business Transfer Agreement was
executory in nature and did not assign the trade name LOPRIN or LOPRIN-DS to
the plaintiff. That Clause 2, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 of the Business
Transfer Agreement dated 1.12.2003 clearly envisage separate brand agreements
for assignment. Thus, plaintiff cannot claim any proprietory interest in the
trade name LOPRIN or LOPRIN-DS.

8\. That the Business Transfer Agreement is dutiable to levy of stamp duty and
none having been paid, the document is inadmissible in evidence.

9\. That ORG-IMS survey relied upon by the plaintiff (as per documents filed)
to show sales of LOPRIN, (at page 119) shows the drug LOPRIN to be a product
of Unichem Laboratories Ltd.

10\. That defendants search with the Trade Marks Registry has revealed that
one Unichem Laboratories Ltd. is the registered proprietor of the trade name
LOPRIN.

11\. In para 18 of reply to IA. No. 9988/06, defendant has pleaded as under:

18\. The Plaintiff has averred at paragraph 9 of the Interlocutory
Application, and even elsewhere, that the adoption by the Defendants of the
mark LOPARIN, is "in respect of identical goods". This averment is false to
the Plaintiff's knowledge. The Plaintiff's product LOPRIN is an analgesic
tablet, containing Aspirin as the active ingredient. The Plaintiff's LOPRIN
tablet is claimed to be for the treatment of Cardiological problems such as
prevention of strokes, recurrent angina, venous thrombosis and embolism. In
fact the Plaintiff's LOPRIN, which has 75mg of aspirin works more like a low
dose "anti-platelet" drug. An anti-platelet drug prevents coagulation and is
used for prevention of adverse cardiac events in patients who are at risk.
Aspiring in such dosage reaches the desired plasma concentration with about 14
days usage. Typically, such low dose aspirin drugs are required to be used and
are used by patients over very long periods of time, generally for life. The
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology, recommends life
long use of such drugs. On the other hand, the Defendant's product LOPARIN
injection, for subcutaneous or intravascular use, is a critical care medicine
used in Acute Coronary Syndrome as anticoagulent in emergency, normally in
Intensive Coronary Care Units (ICCU). It contains the active ingredient
Enoxaparin, which by category belongs to Low Molecular Weight Heparin. Low
Molecular Weight Heparins are used to prevent coagulation from the damaged
endothelium of coronary arteries. LOPARIN forms part of the category of drugs
called anti-coagulatns, which are primarily used in almost all major
complications of the heart and thromboemobolism, like ACS, Post MI,
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI), Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT),
Pulmonary Embolism, with an average usage of 7 days in treating critical
cardiac condition. LOPARIN belongs to the Life Saving Medicines Category and
is typically given to patients in critical hours of vascular complications.
Heparins are of two types: (I) UFH (Unfractionated Heparin) with molecular
weight ranging from 2,00,000 Daltons, and (2) LMWHs (Low Molecule Weight
Heparins) with molecular weight below 20,000 daltons. LOPARIN has a molecular
weight of 4500 daltons and is therefore LMWH. LMWHs have several benefits over
UFH, being more efficacious in saving life with more specificity in action,
lesser side effect in terms of lesser bleeding complications and case of
administration in terms of less frequent monitoring. This Defendant therefore
submits that LOPRIN and LOPARIN are completely different kind of drugs,
directed to remedy different situations. LOPRIN is a preventive medicine used
over very long period of time, to avoid coagulation, but is not effective once
coagulation occurs. LOPARIN is used in critical life threatening situation to
avoid vascular complications and remedy coagulation, once it has occurred. A
patient who has been using LOPRIN for prolong periods of time, is under no
circumstance, likely to mistake LOPARIN injection for LOPRIN tablets.
Furthermore, the character and nature of the product, including the packaging
of the Defendant's LOPARIN is completely dissimilar from the Plaintiff's
LOPRIN tablets. The Carton produced by the Plaintiff contains 10 strips of 14
tablets each, while the Defendant's packet contains Sterile, pyrogen - free
injectable solution in ready to use pre-filled syringe. The Plaintiff's LOPRIN
is sold in traditionally used silver colour aluminum foil of 14 tablets each,
while the Defendant's LOPARIN is sold as 1 pre-filled syringe that is
singularly packed in a white and blue colour box. Not only is the look and the
feel of the product and the packaging for both the products completely
distinct, the mode of administration of the Defendant's product is different
from that of the Plaintiff's. The Defendant's product, being an injection is
not capable of self administration, without proper training and considering
that it is a life saving medicine, it is typically used in ICCU's, under
expert medical supervision and advise. The Plaintiff has deliberately
suppressed the fact that both the products LOPRIN and LOPARIN are Schedule H
drugs, capable of being sold only upon Doctor's prescription, thereby greatly
reducing chances of any deception. Pertinently, doctors always write their
prescription with the dosage form before the brand name and the dose following
the brand name. A typical prescription for LOPRIN would read as "Tab. Loprin
75mg", whereas a typical prescription for LOPARIN would read as "Inj. Loparin
20mg/40mg/50mg/ 60mg/80mg". In the circumstances, there would be no
possibility of confusion or deception in the mind of even unwary consumers and
members of the trade. A strip of 14 LOPRIN tablets of the Plaintiff sells for
Rs. 3.86 while one pre-filled syringe unit of the Defendant sells for Rs.
201/- (20mg), Rs. 306 (40mg), Rs. 405(60mg) and Rs. 480 (80mg). The distinct
and different nature of the product, the mode of administration and the vast
difference in the price of the product of the Defendants, which comes to about
52 times the price of the Plaintiff's for 20mg injection, obviates any chance
of confusion or deception in the minds of the purchasing public and the
members of the trade. The packaging and the get up of the two products is also
completely different. The salient differences between the two products are
mentioned in the table below:

    
    
     Parameter                  Plaintiff's Loprin          Defendant's Loparin
    Dosage from                Tablet                      Injection
    Composition                Aspirin                     Enoxaparin Sodium
    Manufacturing technique    Tablet compression          Fractionation
    Major of strength          Mg. (milligrams)            International Units
    Strength                   75mg.                       20mg/0.2 ml
                                                           40mg/0.4 ml
                                                           60mg/0.6 ml
                                                           80mg/0.8 ml
    Packaging                  Strip of 14 tablets         Sterile, pyrogen - free
                                                           injectable solution
                                                           contained in ready to use
                                                           pre-filled syringe.
    Accessories                None (usually dispensed     A pre-filled syringe with 
                               only in strips and not      needle and patient 
                               even a carton)              information booklet,
                                                           giving, inter alia
                                                           therapeutic indications,
                                                           dosage and method of
                                                           administration, contra
                                                           indications, special
                                                           warnings, precautions for
                                                           use, inter actions with
                                                           other drugs and other
                                                           forms of interactions,
                                                           undesirable effect, etc.
    Mention of Schedule class  None                        Schedule-H
    Manufacturing location     Vapi, Gujarat               Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh
    Prescribers                General Practitioners       Cardiologists and other
                                                           critical care specialists
    Cost                       Rs. 3.86 for 14 tablets     Rs. 201 for 1 syringe of
                                                           20mg, Rs. 306 for 40mg,
                                                           Rs. 405 for 60mg and
                                                           Rs. 480 for 80mg.
    Prescribed as              Rx. Tab. Loprin             Rx. Inj. Loparin
    Mode of purchase           Either a carton containing
                               10 strips of 14 tablets or
                               one strip of 14 tablets or
                               one or few tablets in loose
                               form
                               Normally purchased by the   Always in a carton containing 
                               patient                     on pre-filled syringe.
                                                           Normally supplied by the
                                                           hospital as is used in ICCUs.
    Administration             Self administration only    Injection by/under expert
                                                           medical supervision, by 
                                                           deep subcutaneous route in
                                                           prophylactic and curative
                                                           treatment and by intravascular
                                                           route during hemodialysis.
    Place of Administration    Usually taken at home       Usually administered in ICCUs
    Indication                 Used for prevention of      Used in Acute Coronary
                               adverse cardiac events      Syndrome as anti-coagulent
                               in patients who are at      in emergences.
                               risk
    Nature of therapy          Chronic                     Acute
    Nature, purpose and usage  Works like a low dose       Is an anti-coagulant.
                               anti-platelet.              To deal with critical life
                               To prevent coagulation -    threatening situations, 
                               no effect after occurrence  vascular  complications. 
                               of coagulation.             Used after occurrence of  
                               Only takes effect after     coagulation, typically for
                               the desired plasma          7 days.
                               concentration is reached,   Not used as preventive
                               normally after 14 days      medicine. 
                               of usage.
                               Typically the patient uses
                               for life.
    
    
     
    
     
    
    12. In para No. 19 and 20 of the reply to IA. No. 9988/06, defendant has pleaded:
      
    
    

19\. The Defendant therefore, respectfully submits that the Plaintiff's
Analgesic Tablets, marketed under the trade mark LOPRIN is a completely
different product from LOPARIN, the Low Molecular Weight Heparin Injection.
Aspirin is commonly prescribed as a preventive medication while Enoxaparin is
prescribed in highly critical life threatening condition. There are
significant and fundamental differences between the two products. The use by
the Defendant of the trade mark LOPARIN is completely honest and bonafide.
This Defendant and its products, including LOPARIN enjoy huge reputation and
goodwill in the market. The Plaintiff has therefore wrongly averred that
LOPARIN trade mark is used by the Defendant for "identical goods." Considering
the distinctive nature, it cannot at all be said that the use by the Defendant
of the trade mark LOPARIN is such as to render its use as being likely to be
taken as being use of the Plaintiff's trade mark.

20\. The Defendant No. 2 obtained permission from the Government to
manufacture LOPARIN for the Defendant No. 1, on 16.09.2005, and since October
2005, the Defendant No. 2 has been manufacturing and Defendant No. 1 has been
marketing LOPARIN, across the country. This Defendant has coined LOPARIN
adopting LO from the category of the drug, being Low Molecular Weight Haparin
and PARIN from the name of the molecule - Enoxaparin. This Defendant has
applied for registration of the trade mark LOPARIN, under the Trade Marks Act,
1999 on 26.08.2005. This Defendant has by now incurred an expense of about Rs.
74.67 lacs for the purpose of launch of LOPARIN. The aggregate sale of LOPARIN
till date have been about Rs. 8.89 crores.

13\. In the replication filed, plaintiff has pleaded that all the terms of the
Business transfer Agreement dated 1.12.2003 have been complied with and deed
of assignment dated 17.11.2005 has been executed by Uni Distributors Pvt. Ltd.
That the plaintiff has applied to the Registrar of Trade Marks to transfer
registration of the mark/name LOPRIN in favor of the plaintiff. Other
assertions of the defendant are denied.

14\. Unichem Laboratories Ltd. has filed IA. No. 11119/06 under Order 1 Rule
10 CPC stating:

1\. The Plaintiff has filed the above suit for permanent injunction
restraining infringement of trademark, passing off, damages etc. The Plaint
may kindly be referred to.

2\. The Applicant herein is a marketer of a pharmaceutical product under the
trademark LOPRIN and also owns a registration for the trademark LOPRIN under
853 839 in Class 5. It is submitted that the Plaintiff and the Applicant are
entities having a principle-to-principle agreement with each other.

3\. It is submitted that Defendant No. 1 has taken an objection in its written
statement that the trademark LOPRIN lacks distinctiveness as it cannot be
attributed to one owner because the trademark LOPRIN is registered by the
Applicant and the Plaintiff. However, there is no conflict of ownership
between the Plaintiff and the Applicant for the trademark LOPRIN. It is
submitted that registration of trademark LOPRIN by these two entities is a
matter of internal policy and mutual understanding to protect their valuable
trademark rights in the trademark LOPRIN and steps are being taken to
consolidate all trademarks applications and registrations for said trademark
in the Plaintiff.

4\. Be that as it may, in order to avoid unnecessary controversy the Applicant
may be imp leaded as a Co-Plaintiff in the present suit, in order to enable
this Hon'ble Court to adjudicate upon and effectively settle all questions
involved in the suit.

15\. Shri Man Mohan, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff urged that it
has been judicially recognized that physicians are not immune from confusion
and that many prescriptions are telephoned to the pharmacists. Even if
handwritten, frequently, hand writing is not legible. (see 2004 (28) PTC 585
SC, Milment Oftho Industries and Ors. v. Allargon Inc.). Thus, if phonetic or
visual similarity was found, injunction had to follow was the submission made.
Decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court reported as 2004 (28) PTC 456
Del. Pfizer Ireland Pharmaceuticals v. Intas Pharmaceuticals and Anr. was also
cited to urge that in case of medicinal products, since disaster to health and
in some cases life itself was an issue, stricter standard had to be applied to
medicinal goods. Citing 2002 (254) PTC 592 Bom. Medley Laboratories Pvt. Ltd.
v. Alken Laboratories Ltd. counsel urged that once the mark is identical or
deceptively similar, the other factors, viz., the packing being different,
number of tablets contained in the competing package is not the same, prices
are not identical and/or goods being sold on doctors prescription are
altogether irrelevant and immaterial. Lastly, counsel cited , Cadila Health
Care Ltd. v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. to urge that the two competing
medicines were derivatives of different salts was irrelevant. That decision in
Cadila Health Care's case (supra) held that decision reported in AIR 2000 SC
2114, S.M. Dyechem Ltd. v. Cadbury (India) Ltd. was not good law. That only
similarities and not dissimilarities had to be considered. That as held in
Durga Dutt Sharma's case AIR 1965 SC 890, when once the use by the defendant
of the mark which is claimed to infringe the plaintiffs mark is shown to be
"in the course of trade", the question whether there has been an infringement
is to be decided by comparison of the two marks. Counsel urged that where the
two marks are identical no further questions arise; for then the infringement
is made out. When the two marks are not identical, the plaintiff would have to
establish that the mark used by the defendant so nearly resembles the
plaintiff's registered trade mark as is likely to deceive or cause confusion
and in relation to goods in respect of which it is registered. Learned Counsel
urged that a point has sometimes been raised as to whether the words "or cause
confusion" introduce any element which is not already covered by the words
"likely to deceive" and it has some times been answered by saying that it is
merely an extension of the earlier test.

16\. Relying upon decision in Cadila Health Care Ltd case (supra) counsel
urged that where the drugs have a marked difference in the compositions with
completely different side effects, the test should be applied strictly as the
possibility of harm resulting from any kind of confusion by the consumer can
have unpleasant if not disastrous results. Counsel urged that the courts need
to be particularly vigilant where the defendant's drug, of which passing of is
alleged, is meant for curing the same ailment as the plaintiff's medicine but
the compositions are different. The confusion is more likely in such cases and
the incorrect intake of medicine may even result in loss of life or other
serious health problems.

17\. Interlocutory remedy is normally intended to preserve in status-quo the
rights of the parties which may appear of a prima facie case. As observed by
their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the decision reported as 1990 (Supp.)
SCC 727, Wander Ltd. and Anr. v. Antox India Pvt. Ltd.:

Usually, the prayer for grant of an interlocutory injunction is at a stage
when the existence of the legal right asserted by the plaintiff and its
alleged violation are both contested and uncertain and remain uncertain till
they are established at the trial on evidence. The Court at this stage acts on
certain well settled principles of administration of this form of
interlocutory remedy which is both temporary and discretionary. The object of
the interlocutory injunction, it is stated. ".... is to protect the plaintiff
against injury by violation of his rights for which he could not adequately be
compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the uncertainty were
resolved in his favor at the trial. The need for such protection must be made
against the corresponding need of the defendant to be protected against injury
resulting from his having been preventing from exercising his own legal rights
for which he could not be adequately compensated. The court must weigh one
need against another and determine where the 'balance of convenience' lies.

18\. As observed by their Lordships in Mahendra & Mahendra Paper Mills Ltd v.
Mahindra & Mahindra (1995) 1 AD Delhi 319:

The court also, in restraining a defendant from exercising what he considers
his legal right but what the plaintiff would like to be prevented, puts into
the scales, as a relevant consideration whether the defendant has yet to
commence his enterprise or whether he has already been doing so in which
latter case considerations somewhat different from those that apply to a case
where the defendant is yet to commence his enterprise, are attracted.

19\. On the issue of phonetic similarity and dissimilarity, learned Counsel
for the parties referred to various judgments to bring home the point as to
which words were found to be phonetically similar and which were found to be
otherwise. I need not recap all the decisions inasmuch as, a learned single
Judge of this Court A.K. Sikri, J. in the decision reported as 2002 (25) PTC
262 (Delhi) Pfizer Products Inc. v. B.L. & Co., while dealing with the words
'viagra' and 'penegra' has catalogued the various decisions where it was found
that there was no phonetic similarity, and another learned Single Judge of
this Court, M.B. Lokur, J. in the judgment reported as 2004 (v) A.D. (Delhi)
146 Syncom Formulations India Ltd. v. SAS Pharmaceuticals has listed the
decisions where phonetic similarity was found.

20\. Since I am dealing with the issue at an interlocutory stage, I would be
transgressing my jurisdiction if I travel beyond the well settled principle of
law that at interlocutory stage matter has to be considered only from prima-
facie point of view.

21\. Few judgments catalogued in the two decisions of A.K. Sikri, J. and M.B.
Lokur, J. noted in para 18 above determined the issue by examining the
similarities in the competing marks as also the dissimilarities. This approach
of looking at the essential features by taking into account differences as
well was affirmed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the decision
reported as S.M. Dyechem Ltd. v. Cadbury (India) Ltd. At page 596 of the
report it was observed as follows:

It appears to us that this Court did not have occasion to decide, as far as we
are able to see, an issue where there were also differences in essential
features nor to consider the extent to which the differences are to be given
importance over similarities. Such a question has arisen in the present case
and that is why we have referred to the principles of English Law relating to
differences in essential features with which principles, in our opinion, are
equally applicable in our country.

22\. A subsequent three Judges Bench decision took a contrary view. The
decision is reported as 2001 PTC 300 (SC) Cadila Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. At page 312 of the report, after noting the passage
quoted above in the judgment in S.M. Dyechem's case (Supra), their Lordships
of the Supreme Court observed:

We are unable to agree with the aforesaid observations in Dyechem's Case
(Supra). As far as this Court is concerned, the decisions in the last four
decades have clearly laid down that what has to be seen in the case of a
passing off action is the similarity between the competing marks and to
determine whether there is likelihood of deception or causing confusion.

23\. The decisions noted by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Cadila
Health Care case (Supra) for arriving at the conclusions aforenoted are (i)
National Sewing Thread Co. Ltd. Chidambaram v. James Chadwick & Bros. Ltd.
(ii) Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food Products Ltd. (iii) Amritdhara
Pharmacy v. Satya Deo (iv) Dutt Sharma v. N.P. Lavoratories and (v) F.
Hoffmann-La Roche & Co. Ltd. v. Geoffrey Manner & Co. Pvt. Ltd.

24\. Further, in Cadila Health Care case (Supra), at page 314 of the report,
their Lordships held that a higher standard has to be applied to medicinal
products and that the courts need to be particularly vigilant where the
defendants drug, of which passing off is alleged, is meant for curing the same
ailment as the plaintiff's medicine but the compositions are different.
Further, at page 315 of the report, their Lordships, dealing with the argument
that medicines are sold by Chemists who are trained persons and are less
likely to be deceived, observed as under:

In view of the varying infrastructure for supervision of physicians and
pharmacists of medical profession in our country due to linguistic, urban,
semi-urban and rural divide across the country and with high degree of
possibility of even accidental negligence, strict measures to prevent any
confusion arising from similarity of marks among medicines are required to be
taken.

25\. Their Lordships noted with approval the observations made by Assistant
Commissioner Leeds of the Patent Office in R.J. Strasenburgh Co. v. Kenwood
Laboratories INC. 1955, 106 USPQ 379 as under:

Physicians are not immune from confusion or mistake. Furthermore it is common
knowledge that many prescriptions are telephoned to the pharmacists and others
are hand written, and frequently handwriting is not unmistakenably legible.
These facts enhance the chances of confusion or mistake by the pharmacists in
filling the prescriptions if the marks appear to much alike when hand written
or sound too much alike when pronounced.

26\. The decision in Cadila Health Care case concludes with the following
guidelines for deciding the question of deceptive similarity:

a) The nature of the marks i.e. whether the marks are word marks or label
marks or composite marks, i.e. both words and label works.

b) The degree of resembleness between the marks, phonetically similar and
hence similar in idea.

c) The nature of the goods in respect of which they are used as trade marks.

d) The similarity in the nature, character and performance of the goods of the
rival traders.

e) The class of purchasers who are likely to buy the goods bearing the marks
they require, on their education and intelligence and a degree of care they
are likely to exercise in purchasing and/or using the goods.

f) The mode of purchasing the goods or placing orders for the goods, and

g) Any other surrounding circumstances which may be relevant in the extent of
dissimilarity between the competing marks.

27\. Relief of injunction being an equitable relief, delay becomes relevant
but mere delay in bringing an action for infringement of a trademark or for
passing off is no ground for refusing an injunction. The grant of injunction
becomes necessary if it prime facie appears that the adoption of the mark was
dishonest. See 2004 (28) PTC 121 (SC) Midas Hygiene Industries Pvt. Ltd. v.
Sudhir Bhatia and Ors.

28\. Acquiescence by itself is also no ground to non suit a plaintiff, if
otherwise his claim is found to be genuine. In Willmott v. Barber (1880) 15
Ch.D. 96 Fry, J. said:

It has been said that the acquiescence which will deprive a man of his legal
rights must amount to fraud and in my views this is an abbreviated statement
of a very true proposition. A man is not to be deprived of his legal rights
unless he has acted in such a way as would make it fraudulent for him to set
up those rights.

29\. Acquiescence is nothing but one facet of delay. If a plaintiff stands by
knowingly and lets a defendant build up an important trade until it has became
necessary to crush it, the plaintiff would be stopped by acquiescence. It
would be a fraudulent conduct to allow knowingly somebody to spend money to
build a reputation and then try and crush it.

30\. It is important to distinguish between mere negligence and acquiescence
as was observed by Sr. John Romilly in Harcourt V White 28 Bear 303. As
Explained in Power Control Appliances and Ors. v. Sumeet Machines Pvt. Ltd.
acquiescence is sitting by when another is invading the rights and spending
money on it. It is a course of conduct inconsistent with the claim for
exclusive rights in a trade mark. It implies positive acts, not mere silence
or inaction such as is involved in laches. The observations are another form
of knowingly sitting idle.

31\. Where defense of delay, laches or acquiescence is put forth, another
consideration needs to be put in the scale to see where it tilts. As observed
by Romer J. in the matter of an application brought by J.R. Parkington & Co.
Ltd. (1946) 63 RPC 171, the circumstances which attend the adoption of a trade
mark in the first instance are of considerable importance and honesty of user
is of importance. If the user in its inception was tainted it would be
difficult in most cases to purify it subsequently. Reasons for this stand
explained by B.N. Kirpal J. (as his Lordship then was) in the decision
reported as Hindustan Pencils Pvt. Ltd. v. India Stationary Products Co. In
para 31, it was observed:

Even though there may be some doubt as to whether laches or acquiescence can
deny the relief of a permanent injunction, judicial opinion has been
consistent in holding that if the defendant acts fraudulently with the
knowledge that he is violating the plaintiff's rights then in that case, even
if there is an inordinate delay on the part of the plaintiff in taking action
against the defendant, the relief of injunction is not denied. The defense of
laches or inordinate delay is a defense in equity. In equity both the parties
must come to the Court with clean hands. An equitable defense can be put up by
a party who has acted fairly and honestly. A person who is guilty of violating
the law or infringing or usurping somebody else's right cannot claim the
continued misuse of the usurped right.

32\. Keeping in mind the various factors to be taken into consideration for
deciding the question of similarity between the two trade names or the
likelihood of deception and confusion arising there from, let me examine the
two trade names in the light of submissions of learned Counsel for the
parties.

33\. Admittedly, both products are used for similar type of diseases, namely,
treatment of heart ailment, but whereas LOPRIN is a preventive drug, LOPARIN
is a curative drug. As pleaded by the plaintiff (refer para 9 of the plaint),
LOPRIN is a coined word derived from 'low dose of aspirin' i.e. amalgamation
of the word 'low' and the word 'aspirin', defendants mark LOPARIN is a coined
word derived from 'low molecular weight heparin' and the molecule-Enoxaparin
i.e. amalgamation of the word 'Low' and the word 'Enoxaparin'.

34\. It cannot be ruled with certainty at this stage that defendant has
resorted to a dishonest adoption.

35\. In pharmaceutical trade, one finds names of various drugs almost similar
to each other --- having common prefix or suffix --- for the reason the drug
conveys what salt it is a derivative of.

36\. No doubt, doctors can also err and it is not uncommon for drugs to be
purchased over the telephone and even handwritten prescriptions may be misread
due to bad handwriting, but method of intake of a drug by a person is not to
be ignored.

37\. Plaintiffs product is taken orally and is sold as a pill. Defendant's
product is intramuscularly injected with aid of a syringe. Thus, other factors
like nature of the product, design and get-up of packing, price, weight etc.
have necessarily to be given due recognition.

38\. Factors listed by the defendants in para 18 and 19 of the reply to IA.
No. 9988/06 are critical and, in my opinion, break the deadlock. LOPRIN is an
anti-platelet drug and prevents coagulation. It is prescribed to prevent
adverse cardiac events in patients who are at a risk. It is used by patients
over a long period of time. Loparin is a critical care medicine used in acute
coronary syndrome as an anticoagulant in emergency, normally used in Intensive
Coronary Care Unit. It is administered subcutaneously or intravascularly. The
former is sold as pills in aluminium foils, the latter is sold in prefilled
syringe. Price difference is huge. Over 52 times.

39\. A word on balance of convenience. Defendant has sales of nearby Rs. 8
crores in less than a year. The product is in the market since October, 2005.
Ex-facie, defendants have built a good market. Balance of convenience lies in
favor of the defendants.

40\. Issues of the Business Transfer Agreement not subjected to payment of
stamp duty and effect of subsequent assignment deed are not being dealt with
by me as I am of the opinion that at this stage it is not necessary to
consider the said issues. Similarly, I have not considered effect of
impleadment sought by Unichem Laboratories Ltd. Needless to state, issue of
interim relief has to be predicated on prima facie findings.

41\. The two applications are disposed of vacating the ex-parte injunction
granted on 6.9.2006. But on terms. Defendant shall file yearly statement of
sale of LOPARIN.

42\. The usual mantra. Nothing contained in this order shall be construed as
an expression on the merits of the case. Observations made in the order are
only prima facie findings to decide the fate of the interlocutory application.
Final adjudication would be as per evidence led.

42\. No costs.

