

Bombay High Court

Hirabai Baburao Shidankar vs Rayat Shikshan Sanstha Satara on 19 September,
2008

Bench: R. M. Borde

    
    
                                    :1:
    
               IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE OF BOMBAY
                          BENCH AT AURANGABAD
    
                       WRIT PETITION NO.160 OF 2008
    
         1. Hirabai Baburao Shidankar,
            age: 43 years, Occ: Agriculture,
    
    
    
    
                                                                       
            R/o Shrigonda-Kashti Rasta,
            Taluka Shrigonda,
            District Ahmednagar.
    
    
    
    
                                               
         2. Vitthal Baburao Shidankar,
            age: 44 years, Occ: Agriculture,
            R/o Shrigonda-Kashti Rasta,
            Taluka Shrigonda,
    
    
    
    
                                              
            District Ahmednagar.                         Petitioners
    
                   Versus
    
         1. Rayat Shikshan Sanstha Satara,
            through its Secretary
    
    
    
    
                                     
            Ashokrao Bhoite,
            at Karmaveer Samadhi Parisar,
                           
            Satara, District Satara.
    
         2. Mahadji Shinde Vidyalaya,
            Shrigonda, through its
                          
            Principal Rangnath Somaji
            Rajapure, at Shrigonda,
            Taluka Shrigonda,
            District Ahmednagar.
    
         3. The Sub Divisional Officer,
          
    
    
            Karjat Division, Karjat,
            Taluka Karjat, Dist.Ahmednagar.              Respondents
       
    
    
    
         Mr.P.M.Shah, Senior Counsel holding for S/Shri
         S.P.Shah and D.B.Rode, advocates for Petitioners.
    
    
    
    
    
         Mr.R.N.Dhorde, advocate for Respondents No.1 & 2.
         Mrs.B.R.Khekale, A.G.P. for Respondent No.3.
    
    
                                    CORAM :   R.M.BORDE, J.
    
    
    
                                    Date :    19.09.2008.
    
    
    
    
    
         ORAL JUDGMENT :
    
         1.        Heard    Shri P.M.Shah, learned Senior           Counsel
    
         holding    for S/Shri S.P.Shah and D.B.Rode,           advocates
    
    
    
    
                                               ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 :::
                                            :2:
    
    

for petitioners, Shri R.N.Dhorde, learned Counsel for Respondents No.1 & 2 and
Mrs.B.R.Khekale, learned A.G.P. for Respondent No.3.

. Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith and heard finally by consent of the
parties.

2\. Petitioners, who are tenants in respect of disputed lands, are praying for
quashing and setting aside impugned order dated 15.11.1958, passed by District
Deputy Collector, Parner Division, Ahmednagar, thereby granting exemption
certificate in favour of Respondent No.1-Trust, as contemplated by provisions
of Section 88B (1)(b) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948
(herein after referred to as 'Act of 1948').

3\. Respondent No.1 is a public Trust registered under the provisions of
Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950\. Respondent No.1 is working in the field of
education and runs many schools and colleges including one educational
institution at Shrigonda.

4\. According to petitioners, they are in physical possession over the
agricultural lands bearing G.No.2124/1 (S.No.1040), admeasuring 5 hectares 56
ares, G.No.2124/2 (S.No.1047) admeasuring  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
13:52:53 ::: :3: 6 hectares 36 ares and G.No.2124/18 (S.No.1048), admeasuring
9 hectares 12 ares, situate at Shrigonda, Taluka Sangamner, District
Ahmednagar, as tenants thereof. The lands admittedly belong to a family member
of Shinde Sarkar (Scindia).

5\. Some of the admitted facts are that:

. In the year 1956, Shrimant Jivojirao Madhavrao Scindia executed a deed of
settlement and granted 56 agricultural lands including disputed properties in
favour of the Trust. The District Deputy Collector, Parner Division,
Ahmednagar, granted exemption certificate, as contemplated under Section 88B
of the Act of 1948 in favour of Respondent-Trust on 15.11.1958. It is also an
admitted fact that while issuing certificate by the Deputy Collector, no
notice was served on the tenants and the proceedings are concluded in the
absence of tenants. It is also a fact to be borne out from the record that
impugned order is devoid of reasons.

. A Civil Suit bearing No.83/78 came to be instituted by the Trust in the
Court of Civil Judge, Senior Division, Ahmednagar on 28.03.1978 seeking decree
of restoration of possession of the suit properties and for arrears of rent
against the  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :4: predecessor-in-
title of petitioners. The suit was partly decreed, however, relief of
possession was not granted. The Trust, therefore, approached the appellate
Court by filing Regular Civil Appeal No.166/98, which came to be heard and
disposed of by District Judge, Ahmednagar, who was pleased to grant decree in
respect of recovery of possession in favour of Respondent-Trust on 14.08.2002.
A Second Appeal was presented raising challenge to the judgment and decree
passed by the first appellate Court, before this Court, being S.A.
No.120/2003. However, the appeal came to be dismissed by this Court thereby
confirming the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court on 18.12.2002. In
the concluding portion of the judgment in Second Appeal, it has been observed
by this Court:

> . "Obviously, now it is difficult to hold that the Trust could not have
> claimed such certificate and that it could not be issued without giving
> opportunity of hearing to the appellants, particularly, while dealing with
> the Second Appeal. These questions can be agitated by the appellants by
> filing appropriate writ petition challenging the legality and validity of
> the said certificate. It prima facie appears that the appellants were
> unaware of the certificate in question and were litigating under improper
> impression that they could challenge the said certificate in the proceedings
> before the Civil Court, as per their contentions.

> Consequently, I do not find any substantial question of law involved in the
> Second Appeal, yet I deem it proper  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53
> ::: :5: to grant reasonable time to the appellants to seek appropriate
> remedy regarding challenge to the certificate under Section 88B before the
> appropriate Court."

> It has been further observed that:

> . "All the questions regarding legality of the certificate, competency of
> the appellants to challenge the same, nature of gift or settlement deed, as
> it may be, including conditions imposed while granting permission by the
> Collector, are kept open."

6\. Thus, the petitioners, availing the liberty granted by this Court in
Second Appeal, presented instant petition raising challenge to the exemption
certificate issued by the Deputy exercise of powers under Section 88B of the
Act.

    
    
                                                                   Collector,           in
    
                                                                                       The
                           
    

challenge raised to the certificate by the petitioner is on the grounds set
out below:

(I). According to the petitioners, Trust is entitled to ask for exemption of
certificate subject to fulfilment of three conditions:

(a) That the lands are "property" of the Trust for an educational purpose,
hospital, panjarapole, Gaushala or an institution of public religious worship;

(b) The Trust is or is deemed to be registered as public Trust;

(c) The entire income of the lands is appropriated for the purpose of Trust;

(II). According to the petitioners, these three  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :6: questions are required to be determined by the
Collector, which require certain proof and inquiry cannot be concluded unless
an opportunity is extended to the tenants who are directly affected by grant
of certificate. The tenants can demonstrate, during inquiry, that the Trust is
not registered before the tiller's day or that entire income of the Trust is
not appropriated towards object of the Trust.

(III). The Deputy Collector ought to have appreciated that the tenants can
very well establish that the Trust is not entitled to be granted exemption
certificate and it is not only the matter between Collector and the Trust.

(IV). Sub-section (2) of Section 88B provides for inquiry and the inquiry has
to be conducted in accordance with rules of evidence.

(V). The right conferred upon the cultivator under Section 32 of the Act
stands excluded in view of grant of exemption certificate and as such it was
mandatory for the Deputy Collector to extend an opportunity of hearing to the
tenants before issuing such certificate.

(VI) The order is vitiated on account of failure to  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :7: record reasons in support of the findings.

7\. While controverting the contentions raised by petitioners, it is contended
by Respondents that the challenge raised to an order granting exemption
certificate in 1958, is not open for consideration after lapse of about fifty
years. It is contended that while presenting written statement, petitioners
herein were aware of the exemption certificate and also further raised a
defence that the suit cannot proceed on the basis of exemption certificate
granted without extending an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.

However, in spite of presenting written statement in 1978, no steps were taken
to challenge the said certificate. Petition is, therefore, liable to be
dismissed on the ground of delay and latches.

It is further contended by the Respondents that securing an exemption
certificate is not sine qua non for consideration of the case put up by
Respondents-plaintiffs before the Civil Court. If the conditions prescribed
under Section 88B are fulfilled, the suit for possession is entertainable.

It has been further brought to the notice by Respondents that the Trust has
independently proved its case for grant of exemption and as such the Civil
Court is empowered to grant relief even ignoring certificate issued under
Section 88B of the Act, by  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :8:
the Deputy Collector. It is further contended that finding recorded by the
Civil Court that the Trust has proved the contentions regarding fulfilment of
requirements as required under Section 88B of the Act upon a proper contest,
bars further inquiry in the matter in view of the principle of res judicata.
The finding recorded by the Civil Court regarding fulfilment of the requisites
of Section 88 by the Trust bars further inquiry in the matter, in the instant
writ petition. It is also contended that this Court, while disposing of Second
Appeal, has confirmed the finding recorded by the first appellate Court and
has ig not further granted any blanket permission to the petitioners herein to
raise the issue in writ petition. However, such issue, if raised, is required
to be considered subject to the objection, including competency of the
petitioners to raise challenge to the exemption certificate as well as its
legality. It is, therefore, earnestly contended that the matter in respect of
grant of certificate issued on 15.11.1958 shall not be reconsidered after
lapse of fifty years.

8\. In order to appreciate the controversy raised in the matter, it would be
appropriate to refer to the provisions of Section 88B of the Bombay Tenancy
and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 which are as  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
13:52:53 ::: :9: follows:

> 88B. (1) Nothing in the foregoing provisions except sections 3, 4B, 8, 9,
> 9A, 9B, 9C, 10, 10A, 11, 13 and 27 and the provisions of Chapter VI and VIII
> in so far as the provisions of the said Chapters are applicable to any of
> the matters referred to in the sections mentioned above shall apply-
    
    
                    (a).    to lands held or leased by a
                    local    authority,      or   University
    
    
    
    
                                             
    

> established by law in the Bombay area of the State of Maharashtra; and

> (b). to lands which are the property of a trust for an educational purpose,
> a hospital, Panjarapole, Gaushala or an institution for public religious
> worship:

> (i).

> Provided that-

> such trust is or is deemed to be registered under the Bombay Public Trusts
> Act, 1950, and

> (ii). the entire income of such lands is appropriated for the purposes of
> such trust;

> (c). to lands assigned or donated by any person before the Ist day of August
> 1956 for the purpose of rendering any of the following services useful to
> the community, namely:-

> . maintenance of water works, lighting or filling of water troughs for
> cattle;

> (d). to lands taken under management temporarily by the Civil, Revenue or
> Criminal Courts by themselves, or through receivers appointed by them, till
> the decision of the title of the rightful holders:

> . Provided that, from the date on which the land referred to in clause (d)
> is released from management, all the foregoing provisions of this Act shall
> ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :10: apply thereto; but subject
> to the modifications that in the case of a tenancy, not being a permanent
> tenancy, which on that date subsists in the land-

(i). the landlord shall be entitled to terminate the tenancy under section 31
or under section 33B in the case of a certificated landlord within one year
from such date; and

(ii). within one year from the expiry of the period during which the landlord
or certificated landlord is entitled to terminate the tenancy as aforesaid,
the tenant shall have the right to purchase the land under section 32 or under
section 33-C in the case of an excluded tenant, and

(iii). the provisions of sections 31 to 31-D (both inclusive) (or section 33-A
and 33-B in the case of a certificated landlord) and sections 32 to 32-R (both
inclusive) or sections 33-A and 33-C in the case of an excluded tenant) shall,
so far as may be applicable, apply to the termination of a tenancy or the
right to purchase the land, as aforesaid:

    
    
          .      Provided further that, -
    
          (a).    in   the case of a      permanent
          
    
    
    

tenancy the permanent tenant shall be entitled to purchase the land held by
him on permanent tenancy,-

(i). within one year from the date on which the estate or land is released
from management, or

(ii). where such estate or land was released from management after the
tiller's day but before the commencement of the Bombay Tenancy and
Agricultural Lands (Amendment) Act, 1960, within one year from such
commencement, and

(b). where such permanent tenant is desirous of exercising the right conferred
on him under this proviso, he shall accordingly inform the landlord and
Tribunal in the prescribed manner within the said period of one year and the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :11: provisions of sections 32 to
32-R shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to the right of the permanent
tenant to purchase the land.

(2). for the purposes of this section, a certificate granted by the Collector,
after holding an inquiry, that the conditions in the proviso to sub-section
(1) are satisfied by any trust shall be conclusive evidence in that behalf.

9\. It is true that the certificate has been issued on 15.11.1958 without
extending an opportunity of hearing to the tenants. Proviso to sub-section (2)
of Section 88B casts a responsibility on the Collector to hold an inquiry
before issuance of by the Trust, certificate, in respect of fulfilment of
requirements as provided in sub-section (1) of Section 88B and only after
satisfaction of the issuing authority, such certificate shall be issued, which
shall be a conclusive evidence in that behalf.

The nature of inquiry, required before issuance of certificate, is in respect
of:

(i). The trust is or is deemed to be registered under the Bombay Public Trusts
Act, 1950; and

(ii). The entire income of such lands is appropriated for the purposes of such
trust;

. The tenant, in an appropriate inquiry, can put forth his defence that the
Trust is not  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :12: registered
before the tiller's day or that the entire income of the Trust is not
appropriated towards the object of the Trust.

10\. On consideration of proviso to sub-section (2) of section 88B, it
transpires that extending an opportunity of hearing is must before issuance of
exemption certificate by the Collector.

11\. It has been laid down by the Division Bench of this Court, in the matter
of Shri Keraba Dattu Borachate Vs. Shri Sheshshai and Vishnu Trust, Trust
reported in 1990 (3) BCR 656, that:

. "The reliance of the learned Judge on the provisions of section 88C of the
Act to hold that the Legislature never intended that notice should be issued
to the tenants and inquiry should be held in their presence before grant of
exemption certificate under section 88B of the Act is not appropriate. It is
now well settled that when valuable property rights of a party are affected,
then irrespective of the fact whether the Statute specifically provides for
issuance of notice and inquiry, the forum is duty bound to serve notice upon
the person whose rights are going to be adversely affected. The principles of
natural justice demand that the valuable property rights should not be
deprived without the person being given sufficient opportunity to meet the
claim. The Trust is entitled to an exemption certificate provided two facts
are established: (a) that the Trust is or is deemed to be registered under the
Public Trusts Act and (b) the entire income of lands is appropriated for the
purposes of the  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :13: Trust. Now,
these two questions which are required to be determined by the Collector
demand proof of certain facts and it is not permissible to hold that the
Collector can conclude the inquiry without giving an opportunity to the
tenants who are directly affected by grant of certificate. The tenant could
very well establish that the Trust is not registered before tiller's day or,
in any event, the entire income of the Trust is not appropriated towards the
object of the Trust. By holding that the issue arises only between the Trust
and the Collector, the learned Single Judge deprived the tenants from
establishing that the Trust is not entitled to exemption certificate. Sub-
section (2) of section 88B of the Act prescribed by rule of evidence that the
exemption certificate is conclusive evidence as regards the conditions
provided under section 88B(1)(b) of the Act and, therefore, there is a greater
necessity that the tenants who are going to be seriously prejudiced by grant
of such exemption certificate should be served with the notice and permitted
to participate in the inquiry. The deprivation of a right in such an important
inquiry conducted under the Statute, which was enacted by the Legislature for
conferring valuable rights upon the Cultivators and the Legislation being a
beneficial one is neither just, nor fair. Merely because the Legislature did
not specifically provide for service of notice and opportunity for the tenants
to participate in the inquiry, it is not permissible for the Court to deprive
the tenants of their valuable rights in the agricultural lands by concluding
that the enquiry is only between the Collector and the Trustees. The Collector
while exercising the powers, even assuming performing administrative duties,
still is bound to service notice upon the persons whose property rights are
affected."

12\. The aforesaid view taken by the Division  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
13:52:53 ::: :14: Bench of this Court has been followed in a subsequent
judgment in the matter of Bhimrao Chandru Patil & others Vs. Balkrishna
Dattatraya Joshi & others, others reported in 2002 (3) BCR 731 and in the
matter of Kondiba L. Hanmar Vs. Krishnarao A. Dalavi, Dalavi reported in 2005
(2) BCR 484.

13\. It is now well settled that when valuable property rights of the parties
are affected, then, irrespective of the fact that whether the statute
specifically provides a notice of inquiry, the Forum is duty bound to serve
notice upon the persons whose rights are going to adversely affected.

14\. The Trust is entitled to seek exemption certificate on fulfilment of the
requirements provided under Section 88B, however, in an appropriate inquiry,
the tenant can very well contend that on failure to fulfil the requirements
mandated by the Statute, the Trust is not entitled to secure exemption
certificate. Even sub-section (2) of Section 88B prescribes holding of an
inquiry by the Collector, which necessarily presupposes extending of an
opportunity of hearing to the party whose rights are likely to be affected.
Therefore, there is a greater necessity, while holding an inquiry, to extend
an opportunity of hearing to the tenant whose  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
13:52:53 ::: :15: rights are likely to be affected by grant of such exemption
certificate. The valuable right, as provided under the tenancy law, conferred
upon the tenant to protect his possession, is taken away by grant of exemption
certificate and, therefore, valuable rights of tenant are prejudicially
affected and as such there is need to hear the tenant before proceeding to
issue exemption certificate.

15\. In order to controvert the contentions raised by the petitioners, it is
contended by the Respondents, placing reliance on the judgment of the Apex
Court in the matter of Maneksha Ardeshir Irani & another Vs. Manekji Edulji
Mistri & others, others reported in AIR 1974 SC 2123, wherein it is observed
that the inquiry is between the Collector and the Trust and 'conclusive
evidence' clause mentioned in the section means it is a rule of evidence which
would not render necessary for it to prove again the compliance with the
requirements.

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
         16.       The       Division     Bench    of this Court,             in     the
    
         matter    of       Shri Keraba Dattu Borachate & others                     Vs.
    
         Shri     Sheshashai         and Vishnu Trust,
                                                Trust reported in                  1990
    
    
    
    
    
    

(3) BCR 656, while considering the ratio laid down in the judgment of the Apex
Court, cited supra, has observed thus:

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :16:

. "The observations that the inquiry is between the Collector and the Trust,
therefore, must be read with reference to the peculiar facts of the case
before the Supreme Court. In our judgment, it is not possible to conclude that
the Supreme Court intended to lay down that in the enquiry conducted by the
Collector under sub-section (2) of Section 88B of the Act, it is not necessary
to serve any notice upon the tenant whose valuable property rights would be
destroyed by grant of exemption certificate."

It has been further observed that:

. "In our judgment, the Collector is bound to issue a notice to the tenant of
the agricultural lands before holding an inquiry before granting exemption
certificate under Section 88B of the Act."

17\. In view of the reasons recorded above, in my opinion, the Collector is
bound to issue a notice to the tenant of the agricultural land during the
conduct of inquiry and must permit the tenant to participate in the inquiry
proceedings before a request made by the Trust for issuance of exemption
certificate is granted under Section 88B of the Act.

In view of non observance of principles of natural justice and in view of
failure to serve a notice calling upon the tenant to submit his say, in the
instant case, the order in respect of issuance of exemption certificate, as
contemplated under Section 88B of the Act, is vitiated and cannot be
sustained.

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :17:

18\. It has been contended by learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust that even
in the absence of a certificate, as contemplated by Section 88B (2) of the
Act, the Civil Court can very well consider the issue in respect of exemption
from operation of the provisions of Tenancy Act on fulfilment of the
conditions mentioned in the Section and is entitled to grant relief in favour
of the landlord. It is contended that even otherwise, the Civil Court has
considered the issue and held that the Trust deserves to grant concession in
view of the provisions of Section 88B of the Act.

19\. Shri Dhorde, learned Counsel appearing for Respondent-Trust, placing
reliance on the judgment in the matter of Poulad Deochand Patil Vs. Samasta
Aher Nhavi Panch Trust and another, another reported in 1992 (2) BCR 583, has
contended that notwithstanding the production of a certificate issued by the
Collector, as contemplated under sub section (2) of Section 88B of the Tenancy
Act, the Civil Court can consider the question, as to whether the Trust
satisfies the requirements for grant of exemption. Learned Counsel has invited
my attention to the following observations made in the reported judgment:

. "It is not a condition of exemption available to a public trust  :::
Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :18: under section 88-B of the Tenancy
Act that it must necessarily possess the certificate issued by the Collector
under sub-section (2) of section 88-B. The statute provides that if the
prescribed conditions are objectively satisfied by the trust, the land in
question shall be treated as exempted from prescribed provisions of the Act
notwithstanding the fact that the holder of the land may not possess the
certificate of exemption. If the trust produces the certificate issued under
sub-section (2) of section 88-B of the Tenancy Act before the Civil Court or
any other authority, production of such certificate by itself is liable to be
considered as conclusive evidence of the fact that the trust has duly
satisfied the prescribed conditions of exemption. If no such certificate is
produced by the plaintiff-trust in the civil suit, the Civil Court is not
precluded in law from considering the question as to whether the trust
satisfied the requisite conditions or not for exemption. In such a case, the
trust cannot avail of the presumptive rule of evidence."

20\. In Poulad Patil's (supra) case, issuance of certificate in favour of the
Trust was without observing the principles of natural justice. The court,
therefore, relying upon the judgment of the Division Bench in the matter of
Kerba Dattu Borachate (supra), held that the tenant is entitled to be heard
before issuance of the certificate. The matter was, therefore, remitted back
to the Collector for reconsideration of the issue. The objection in respect of
petitioner being guilty of latches in presenting the petition was raised. In
the reported judgment in Poulad Patil's case, the certificate was issued in
the year 1959 and the matter had arisen for  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
13:52:53 ::: :19: consideration before the Court in the year 1992.

However, the Court observed that as the order of grant of exemption issued by
the Collector under sub section (2) of Section 88B is vitiated on account of
non observance of principles of natural justice, the matter is required to be
remitted back to the Collector for reconsideration of the issue after
extending an opportunity of hearing to the tenant whose rights are being
prejudicially affected.

    
    
    
    
    
         21.        The        plain     reading of Section 88B                 makes        it
    
    
    
    
                                                  
         clear     that        exemption certificate can be granted                          in
    
         favour     of
                               
                              the     Trust which has leased out                   a     land,
    
         provided         the        Trust        satisfies     the      requirements,
                              
         namely-
    
    
    
         (a)        Such trust is or is deemed to be registered
          
    
    
    

under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950; and

(b) The entire income of such land is appropriated for the purposes of such
Trust.

22\. Sub section (2) of Section 88B deals with grant of exemption certificate
by the Collector after holding an inquiry and which shall be a conclusive
evidence in that behalf. The Section presupposes inquiry by the Collector for
the purposes of issuance of a certificate. The question, whether the Trust is
entitled to seek exemption under the provisions of Section 88B of the Act, is
required to be determined  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :20:
under the provisions of Tenancy Act and by the authority constituted for
considering such issue.

Whether a particular Trust, which has leased out the land in favour of the
tenant, is entitled to seek exemption in respect of operation of the
provisions of Tenancy Act, is a question which arises out of the tenancy
proceedings and, therefore, in view of the provisions of Section 85 of the
Act, jurisdiction of the Civil Court to settle, decide or deal with the
question is taken away. Section 85 of the Act reads thus:

85.

(1) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any
question [(including a question whether a person is or was at any time in the
past a tenant and whether any such tenant is or should be deemed to have
purchased from his landlord the land held by him)] which is by or under this
Act required to be settled, decided or dealt with by the Mamlatdar or
Tribunal, a Manager, the Collector or the [Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal] in
appeal or revision or the [State] Government in exercise of their powers of
control.

    
    
    
                    (2) No order of     the Mamlatdar,                    the
    
    
    
    
    
                    Tribunal,    the   Collector   or                     the
                    [Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal] or                     the
                    [State] Government made under this                    Act
                    shall be questioned in any Civil                       or
                    Criminal Court.
    
                    Explanation-For the purposes    of this
    
    
    
    
    
    

section a Civil Court shall include a Mamlatdar's Court constituted under the
Mamlatdars' Courts Act, 1906.

23\. My attention has been invited to a judgment  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :21: of the Apex Court in the case of Gundaji Satwaji
Shinde Vs. Ramchandra Bhikaji Joshi, Joshi reported in AIR 1979 SC 653. The
issue which came up for consideration before the Apex Court was in respect of
bar created under the Tenancy Act for alienation of land in favour of a person
who is not an agriculturist. The issue arose, in a matter before the Civil
Court in the suit presented for seeking a decree of specific performance, was
as to whether the prospective purchaser is an agriculturist. The issue as to
whether the plaintiff is an agriculturist was taken up for decision in the
reported judgment, by the trial Court holding that the issue, that has arisen,
is incidental or subsidiary issue. In an appeal presented in the matter, the
High Court agreed with the finding of the trial Court as regards validity of
the certificate and observed that the Civil Court has jurisdiction to
entertain the suit and while considering the main issue, the Civil Court could
consider as to whether the transaction is forbidden by law and proceed to
decide the subsidiary issue as to whether the plaintiff is an agriculturist.
The Apex Court, while dealing with the question, has expressed that it is the
exclusive domain of the tenancy authorities to consider the issue and by
branding it as substantial or incidental or principal or subsidiary, the Civil
court cannot  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :22: arrogate to
itself the jurisdiction which is statutorily ousted. The Apex Court, in
paragraph 10 of the judgment, has observed thus:

> . "Upon a proper construction the expression "any issues which are required
> to be settled, decided or dealt with by any authority competent to settle,
> decide or deal with such issues under this Act" in S.85-A would only mean
> that if upon assertion and denial and consequent contest an issue arises in
> the context of the provisions of the Tenancy Act and which is required to be
> settled, decided and dealt with by the competent authority under the Tenancy
> Act, then notwithstanding the fact that such an issue arises in a properly
> constituted civil suit cognizable by the Civil Court, it would have to be
> referred to the competent authority under the Tenancy Act."

> The Apex Court has further observed:

> . "In a civil suit nomenclature of the issue as principal or subsidiary or
> substantial or incidental issue is hardly helpful because each issue, if it
> arises, has to be determined to mould the final relief. Further Ss. 85 and
> 85-A oust jurisdiction of Civil Court nor in respect of civil suit but in
> respect of questions and issues arising therein and S.85-A mandates the
> reference of such issues as are within the competence of the competent
> authority. If there is an issue which had to be settled, decided or dealt
> with by competent authority under the Tenancy Act, the jurisdiction of the
> Civil Court, notwithstanding the fact that it arises in an incidental manner
> in a civil suit, will be barred and it will have to be referred to the
> competent authority under the Tenancy Act. By such camouflage of treating
> issues arising in a suit as substantial or incidental or principal or
> subsidiary, Civil Court cannot arrogate to itself jurisdiction which is
> statutorily ousted. This  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :23:
> unassailable legal position emerges from the relevant provisions of the
> Tenancy Act."

24\. After harmonious reading of Section 88B (1) and (2), it would lead to
unescapable inference that the question in respect of grant of exemption from
the operation of Tenancy Act, in favour of a Trust, is required to be dealt
with by the Collector who shall be competent to issue a certificate after
holding an inquiry. Section 88B provides a forum for holding an inquiry and
for issuance of a certificate.

The question, which arises, is in respect of Act exemption from operation of
the provisions of Tenancy which is necessarily an issue arising out of the
provisions of Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act. The net result of
grant of exemption in favour of a Trust is that the valuable rights, which are
vested in the tenant in respect of protection under the provisions of Bombay
Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, are taken away. Considering the
consequences of action of grant of exemption certificate which results in
serious consequence of taking away the rights conferred by the provisions of
Tenancy Act, in a tenant, the question, necessarily shall have to be addressed
by the forum which is prescribed by the Act. Sub section (2) of Section 88
vests in Collector jurisdiction to hold an inquiry and issue certificate. A
forum is created under the  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :24:
provisions of Tenancy Act for inquiring into the matter. The question to be
determined regarding grant of exemption of Tenancy Act is necessarily a
question which falls within the domain of provisions of Bombay Tenancy and
Agricultural Lands Act.

Therefore, in my view, considering the mandate of Section 85 of the Act,
jurisdiction of the Civil Court to settle, decide or deal with the question is
taken away. The question which is required to be determined by the forum,
created under the Tenancy Act, may be arising in an incidental or subsidiary
manner. The issue may be substantial or principal, however, jurisdiction of
the Civil Court to deal with the question is necessarily taken away in view of
the provisions of Section 85 of the Act. The issue is required to be dealt
with by the competent tenancy authority. In my view, sub section (2) of
Section 88B of the Act provides for a forum to deal with the question and,
therefore, jurisdiction of the Civil Court to consider the question, as to
whether the Trust is entitled to seek exemption on fulfilment of requirements
noted in sub section (1)(a) and 1(b) of Section 88, is taken away. While
dealing with the issue in Poulad Patil's case, the attention of Court was not
invited to provisions of Section 85 of the Act and the decision rendered by
Apex Court in Gundaji Satwaji's case (cited supra). Therefore, the  :::
Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :25: ratio laid down by Apex Court in
Gundaji Satwaji's case will have to be accepted as binding precedence.

25\. The argument advanced by learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust that while
dealing with the appeal, the first appellate Court has given a finding that
even in spite of issuance of certificate under Section 88B in favour of the
Trust and even considering the objection raised by the defendant in respect of
issuance of such certificate on the ground of non observance of principles of
natural justice, the plaintiff-Trust has independently proved its entitlement
to secure exemption, as the conditions enumerated under Section 88B are
fulfilled by the Trust. In my view, it was not for the Civil Court to consider
the question and give finding as to whether the Trust fulfils the requirements
as provided under Section 88B for seeking exemption from the operation of
provisions of Tenancy Act. A forum created under the Act i.e. in view of sub
section (2) of Section 88B, it is the Collector, who is required to go into
the question and record its finding. Therefore, jurisdiction of the Civil
Court to deal with the question, which falls within the exclusive domain of
Collector, is ousted. The finding recorded by the Civil Court, in that regard,
therefore, will have to be ignored.

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :26:

26\. Learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust has invited my attention to the
observations made by the first appellate Court in Regular Civil Appeal
No.166/98, which reads thus:

. "Therefore, I hold that though the certificate u/s. 88(B) of the B.T.

& A.L. Act is not binding upon the defendant No.1 but the plaintiff-trust has
independently proved its case for the exemption and therefore, I hold that the
plaintiff's suit for possession in the Civil Court is tenable and the suit
lands are exempted from the application of S.32 of the B.T. & A.L. Act."

    
    
         .          In
                               
                          view of the analogy given above, I am                       of
    
         the     view     that the Civil Court is not              competent          to
                              
         deal     with the question which falls within the domain
    
         of     tenancy authorities and jurisdiction of the Civil
    
         Court     to deal with the question is ousted in view of
          
    
    
    

provisions of Section 85 of the Act.

27\. It is contended by Shri Dhorde, learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust that
this finding recorded by the Civil Court is confirmed by the High Court in
Second Appeal bearing No.120/2003, which has been summarily dismissed. In my
view, the question of determination of an issue in respect of grant of
exemption certificate under Section 88B of the Act is outside the domain of
the Civil Court and, therefore,  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 :::
:27: there cannot be any impediment for consideration of the issue by this
Court in the instant writ petition.

Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure deals with a situation where the
issue has been dealt with or decided by a Court competent to try and decide
the suit or deal with an issue. However, in my opinion, Civil Court is not
competent to deal with the issue which does not fall within the exclusive
domain of the Civil Court and in the instant matter, in relation to grant
exemption from operation of provisions of Tenancy Act in favour of the Trust,
the issue was not required to be dealt with by the Civil Court. As such the
bar as canvassed by learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust for consideration of
the issue, which according to learned Counsel for the Respondent, has been
dealt with by the Civil Court, does not arise.

28\. Shri Dhorde, learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust, has vehemently
contended that the petition presented by the tenant is required to be thrown
away on the ground of latches. According to him, delay in presenting the
petition is not condonable. The impugned certificate in question has been
issued in the year 1958, whereas challenge is raised in respect of issuance of
said certificate in the year 2007, which according to the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :28: Respondent-Trust, is quite belated and on that
count alone, petition shall have to be dismissed. Learned Counsel Shri Dhorde
has contended that the tenant was very much aware in respect of issuance of
certificate in favour of the Trust. The suit was presented in the year 1978 by
the Trust seeking possession of tenanted property. The suit was contested by
the tenant by presenting written statement. In the written statement, there is
a specific averment in respect of exemption certificate and it is further
contended that the tenant was very much aware that the challenge is required
to be raised to the exemption certificate before the appropriate authority.
However, according to the Respondent, tenant has failed to raise challenge
within reasonable time and, therefore, is not entitled to agitate the
grievance in this petition in respect of a certificate which is issued as far
as back in the year 1958.

29\. If we consider the peculiar situation in the instant matter, it would be
evident that the impugned certificate has been issued by the Collector
admittedly without observance of principles of natural justice. Before issuing
a certificate, due notice was required to be given to the tenant calling upon
him as to why exemption, as prayed for, shall  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
13:52:53 ::: :29: not be granted. It is to be taken note of that valuable
property rights vested in the tenant are affected by issuance of exemption
certificate in favour of the trust. The tenant looses his valuable right of
becoming purchaser of the property on tiller's day. Loss of his right under
Section 32 results in serious prejudice to the interest of the tenant, as the
landlord, in such eventuality, need not approach tenancy authorities for
recovery of possession and he can straightway proceed to institute a suit in
the Civil Court on the basis of his relationship as lessor and lessee, which
comes within the purview of provisions of Transfer of Property Act. The
tenant, therefore, is deprived of valuable protection granted in his favour
under the provisions of Tenancy Act. The impugned certificate, though issued
in the year 1958, admittedly without observing principles of natural justice
and, therefore, does not seek to bind the petitioners and the question of
latches cannot come in the way for raising challenge to such an order which is
issued without observing principles of natural justice.

30\. Apart from this aspect, the landlord presented a suit claiming possession
of the disputed property in 1978. The suit presented by the plaintiff came to
be partly decreed in the year 1998.

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :30:

However, relief in respect of possession of the suit property claimed by
plaintiff-Trust was refused. In an appeal presented by plaintiff-trust, being
R.C.A.

NO.166/98, the first appellate Court has granted decree in favour of the Trust
and held the plaintiff entitled to recover possession of the tenanted
property. The first appellate Court took upon itself the task to enquire into
whether the plaintiff-trust is entitled to seek exemption as provided under
Section 88B of the Act and after holding that the Trust fulfils the
requirements within the meaning of sub-section 1(a) and 1(b) of Section 88B of
the Act, proceeded to hold plaintiff-trust entitled to secure possession. The
judgment and decree passed by the first appellate Court has been confirmed in
Second Appeal No.120/2003. While commenting upon the certificate issued in
favour of the Trust, the learned Single Judge of this Court has held that the
question can be agitated by the tenant by filing appropriate writ petition
raising challenge to the legality and validity of the certificate; and while
disposing of the Second Appeal, this Court has granted reasonable time to the
tenant to seek appropriate remedy. This Court has specifically kept all the
questions open in respect of legality of the certificate, competency of the
appellants to challenge the same, nature of gift or settlement  ::: Downloaded
on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :31: deed, as it may be, including conditions
imposed while granting permission by the Collector.

31\. Taking advantage of the liberty granted by this Court while disposing of
Second Appeal, instant writ petition is presented. Second Appeal is disposed
of by this Court on 11th September 2007, whereas, instant petition is
presented on 19th December 2007. Considering progress of the litigation, I am
of the view that instant writ petition cannot be thrown away on the ground of
delay and latches.

32\. Shri Shah, learned Senior Counsel appearing for petitioners, has
contended that the order passed by the Collector in respect of exemption
certificate is a non speaking order. It is essential that while rendering
decision, the decision making authority shall record reasons for arriving at
the conclusions.

The reasons in respect of the decision are required to be recorded in the
order passed by the Collector, which ultimately gives an opportunity to
otherside to pursue the superior forum that the reasons, which persuaded the
Collector to pass an order adverse to his interest, were erroneous, irrational
or irrelevant and that the obligation to record reason operates as deterrent
against possible arbitrary  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :32:
action by the executive authority invested with power to grant exemption
certificate. In the instant matter, the impugned order, which does not record
reasons for arriving at a satisfaction for grant of exemption certificate by
the Collector, is vitiated on that count also.

33\. In view of the reasons recorded above, I am of the view that the writ
petition presented by petitioners-tenants needs to be allowed and same is
accordingly allowed. The impugned order issued by District Deputy Collector,
Parner Division, Ahmednagar, under Section 88B of the Bombay Tenancy and
Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, in respect of issuance of exemption certificate
dated 15.11.1958 is quashed and set aside. The matter is remitted back to the
Collector, Ahmednagar, for reconsideration of the issue in respect of grant of
exemption certificate, as provided under Section 88B of the Act. The Collector
may, either himself to deal with the issue or assign the matter to proper
subordinate officer entrusted with the functions to deal with such an issue.
The Collector or any such officer, dealing with the matter, shall, after
extending an opportunity of hearing to all the parties concerned, render
decision in accordance with the provisions of Bombay Tenancy & Agricultural
Lands Act, 1948.

::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53 ::: :33:

Considering long pendency of the matter, it would be desirable that the
Collector shall render decision in the matter expeditiously and as far as
possible before end of May-2009.

34\. Rule is made absolute in above terms with no order as to costs.

35\. Learned Counsel for Respondent-Trust has prayed for suspension of effect
and operation of this judgment for a short period to enable his client to
approach the superior Court. Taking into consideration ig the request made,
effect and operation of this judgment is suspended for a period of four weeks.

(R.M.BORDE) JUDGE ******* bad/wp16008  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 13:52:53
:::

