

Bombay High Court

Keki Pestonji Jamadar And Anr. vs Kohodadad Merwan Irani And Ors. on 22
November, 1971

Equivalent citations: AIR 1973 Bom 130, (1972) 74 BOMLR 198, ILR 1973 Bom 80

Author: Chandrachud

Bench: Kotwal, Chandrachud, Deshmukh

JUDGMENT Chandrachud, J.

1\. Claiming to be a joint owner of a land, one Rodabai Khodadad Merwan Irani
filed Civil Suit No. 56 of 1958 against her brother Jamshedji and her sister
Baimai for partition and separate possession of her one-third share. She
withdrew that suit on 3rd August 1959 in pursuance of an agreement dated 19th
July 1959, under which Jamshedji agreed to convey the property to the "Tarapur
Parsee Zoroastrain Anjuman Trust" reserving a life interest to himself.
Jamshedji did execute a deed of trust on 24th April 1960 but he created
thereunder a life interest not only in favour of himself but also in favour of
one Jerbai Irani. On the death of Jamshedji on 9th April 1962, the trustees
took possession of the land. In the meanwhile, Baimai had died on 27th March
1960.

2\. On 4th August 1962, Rodabai brought this suit (No. 131 of 1962) in the
Court of the Civil Judge, Junior Division, Dahanu, Impleading thereto the
Trustees (defendants 1 to 7), the heirs of Baimal (defendants 8 to 13) and the
Charity Commissioner (defendant 14). By her suit, Rodabai asked for partition
and separate possession of her one-half share in the suit property, the other
half, according to her, being of the ownership of defendants 8 to 13. Her case
is that under the agreement dated, 19th July 1959, she and her sister were to
get the property in equal shares on the death of their brother Jamshedji,
unless he created a trust reserving no more than a life interest to himself
and to himself only.

3\. The Charity Commissioner filed his written statement in the suit on 21st
November 1962 contending that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to decide
the questions raised in the suit as defendant 1 had filed an application under
Section 18 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 (herein called "the Act") and
as the inquiry into that application was pending before the Assistant Charity
Commissioner under Section 19 of that Act. The application under Section 18
was filed by defendant 1 on 1st November 1962 for registration of the Trust in
the name of "Jamshed Baug Trust." By their written statement dated 12th
December 1962 the trustees raised several other contentions with which we are
not concerned here. On a motion made by the Charity Commissioner the suit was
stayed, pending the decision of the inquiry under Section 19.

4\. Rodabai was thereafter impleaded to that inquiry. She filed her objections
in that proceeding, contending that the provisions of the trust deed executed
by Jamshedji were in breach of the agreement of 19th July 1959 and therefore,
the trust was invalid. She also contended that the Assistant Charity
Commissioner had no jurisdiction to decide or deal with the questions raised
by her and that those questions had to be decided in the suit which she had
brought even before defendant 1 had made the application under Section 18. On
the day of hearing, she filed an application stating that "the important
question of title to the property is being litigated in a Court of competent
jurisdiction", that "no useful purpose will be served by pursuing this
application till the final decision in the suit" and therefore, she did not
want to take further part in the proceedings. On Rodabai's death her legal
representatives filed a note stating similarly that they did not desire to
take part in the inquiry.

5\. On 14th September 1963, the Assistant Charity Commissioner concluded the
inquiry, holding that the trust existed, that it was a public trust and that
the sole property included in the trust deed survey No. 112/2 of Boisar,
District Thana - was the property of the trust. Rodabai's heirs took no notice
of these findings.

6\. Going back to Rodabai's suit from which this appeal arises, after her
heirs were brought on the record of the suit, the trial Court dismissed the
suit holding on a preliminary contention that it had no jurisdiction to decide
or deal with the questions raised in the suit by reason of the bar arising
under Section 80 of the Act. This decree was reversed by appeal by the learned
Assistant Judge, Thana, who remanded the suit for hearing on the other issues.
Against that order defendants 1 and 2 have filed this appeal. In view of
certain judgments of this Court and in view of the importance of the questions
involved in the appeal. Vimadlal, J., before whom the appeal came for hearing,
has referred two questions for the decision of the Full Bench. We have
modified those questions to read as follows :

(1) Is the question whether the author of the trust was the lawful owner of
the property of which he has created the trust or had otherwise authority to
create the particular trust, covered by Section 79 read with Section 80 of the
Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950?

(2) Can a person who has once appeared in the proceedings under the Bombay
Public Trusts Act and has made his contentions therein on the above question,
bring a suit in a Civil Court in respect of such a question? or, (3) Has the
Civil Court no jurisdiction to deal with or decide such a question by reason
of Section 80 of the Act ?

7\. The provisions of the Act may, for convenience, be considered under four
heads: (1) Initiation of proceedings, (2) The Scope of Inquiry, (3) Remedies
available to persons aggrieved by orders passed under the Act and (4) Ouster
of jurisdiction of Civil Courts.

8\. Initiation of proceedings : S. 18 (1) of the Act casts a duty on the
trustee of every public trust to which the Act applies, to make an application
for the registration of that trust. What constitutes a trust has not been
defined in the Act, but Section 2(20) provides that words and expressions used
but not defined in the Act and defined in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 shall
have the meaning assigned to them in that Act. Section 3 of the Indian Trusts
Act defines a trust as "an obligation annexed to the ownership of property and
arising out of confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner or declared and
accepted by him for the benefit of another and of another and the owner."
Section 2(13) of the Act defines a public trust to mean an express or
constructive trust for either a public, religious or charitable purpose or
both and includes a temple, a math and a wake etc., and a society formed
either for a religious or charitable purpose for both and registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860. Section 18 (2) requires that an application
under Section 18 (1) must be made to the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner of the particular region or sub-region. Sections 5 (2) and 5
(2-A) provide for the appointment of a Deputy Charity Commissioner and an
Assistant Charity Commissioner and prescribe the qualifications necessary for
appointment to these posts. Section 18 (4) provides that in the case of a
public trust created before the Act was applied to it, the application must be
made within three months from the date of the application of the Act, and in
the case of a public trust created after the Act comes into force, within
three months of its creation. Section 18 (5) provides that the application
must contain "particulars", like the name of the trust, the names of the
trustees, the mode of succession to the office of the trustee etc., and such
other particulars which may be prescribed by the rules.

9\. In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 84 of the Act, the State
Government has framed "The Bombay Public Trusts Rules, 1951" (hereinafter
called "the Rules"). Rule 6 provides that in addition to the particulars
specified in S. 18 (5), the application for registration shall contain
particulars regarding documents creating the trust, objects of the trust, etc.
Rule 7-A which was introduced for the first time on 28th December 1967
provides that on receipt of an application, the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner shall cause a public notice to be given in a local newspaper and
that a copy of such notice shall be affixed on the notice board as also on
some conspicuous part of the property, calling upon all persons having
interest, to submit their objections within thirty days. This rule has been
substituted by a new rule with effect from 12th June 1970 but, in material
respects, the new rule is identical with the old. Under Schedule B to the Act
read with Section 79-D, an application for the registration of a public trust
has to bear a Court-fee stamp of Rs. 2/-, Under R. 6 (5), the application is
also required to be accompanied by a cash fee varying between Rs. 3/- and Rs.
25/- depending upon the value of the property belonging to the public trust.

10\. Scope of the Inquiry : S. 19 (1) and (2) provide that on the receipt of
an application under Section 18 or upon an application made by any person
having interests in a public trust or on his own motion, the Deputy or
Assistant Charity Commissioner shall make an inquiry in the prescribed manner
for the purpose of ascertaining whether a trust exists and whether such trust
is a public trust, and whether any property is property of such trust.
Briefly, Section 2(10) defines "person having interest", as including persons
who in the case of a temple are entitled to attend it or in the case of a
math, the disciples of the math or in the case of a wake, persons who are
entitled to receive a benefit from the wake or in the case of any other public
trust, any beneficiary. Rule 7 which deals with the manner of inquiry provides
that except as expressly provided in the rules, inquiries under the Act shall
be held as far as possible in the Greater Bombay Region in accordance with the
procedure prescribed for the trial of suits under the Presidency Small Cause
Courts Act, 1882, and elsewhere under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act,
1887. The rule further says that in any inquiry a party may appear in person
or by his recognized agent or by a pleader duly appointed to act on his
behalf, provided that if the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner so
directs such appearance shall be made by the party in person. Rule 11, which
provides for the manner of recording evidence of witnesses, says that at any
inquiry or other proceeding under the Act as the examination of each witness
proceeds, the officer holding the inquiry or proceeding shall make a
memorandum in English of the substance of what each witness deposes and if the
officer is unable to make such a memorandum, he shall cause it to be made in
writing from his dictation. Section 73 provides that in holding inquiries
under the Act, the officer holding it shall have the same powers that are
vested in Courts under the Code of Civil Procedure in respect of proof of
facts by affidavits, summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath, compelling the production of documents and issuing of
commissions. Under Section 74, all inquiries under the Act are deemed to be
judicial proceedings within the meaning of Sections 193, 219 and 228 of the
Indian Penal Code.

11\. Under Section 20, on completion of the inquiry under Section 19, the
Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner has to record his findings with
reasons therefor as to the matters mentioned in Section 19. Under Section 21
(1), the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner has to make entries in the
register kept under Section 17 in accordance with the findings recorded by him
and under Section 21 (2) the entries so made shall, subject to the provisions
of the Act and subject to any change recorded under the other provisions be
"final and conclusive". Section 22 imposes an obligation on the trustees to
report a change or a proposed change in the entries, to the Deputy or
Assistant Charity Commissioner within a certain period. Under Section 22-A, if
at any time after the entries are made in the register under Section 21 or 22
it appears to the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner that "any
particular relating to any public trust, which was not the subject-matter of
the inquiry under Section 19, or sub-section (3) of Section 22, as the case
may be, has remained to be inquired into, further inquiry may be made in the
prescribed manner and the entries may be changed accordingly. The provisions
of Sections 19, 20, 21 and 22 are made applicable to the inquiries held under
Section 22-A. Under Section 26 any court of competent jurisdiction deciding
any question relating to any public trust which by or under the provisions of
the Act it is not expressly or impliedly barred from deciding, has to send a
copy of is decision to the Charity Commissioner who has to make entries in the
register kept under Section 17 so as to accord with such decision. Under Rule
8 when a public trust is enrolled in the Register of Public Trusts, a
certificate in the prescribed form has to be issued to the trustees in token
of the registration. Under Section 21 no suit to enforce a right on behalf of
a public trust which has not been registered under the Act can be heard or
decided by any Court.

12\. Remedies available to persons aggrieved by orders passed under the Act:
Section 70 provides, to the extent material, that an appeal may be filed to
the Charity Commissioner against the finding or order of the Deputy or
Assistant Charity Commissioner under Sections 20 and 22-A. Under sub-section
(3) of Section 70 the Charity Commissioner has the power to direct the Deputy
or Assistant Charity Commissioner to make further inquiry or to take such
additional evidence as he may think necessary or he may himself take such
additional evidence. Under Section 70-A (1), in any of the cases mentioned in
Section 70 the Charity Commissioner may call for and examine the record and
proceedings of such case for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the
correctness of any finding or order passed by the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner. The Charity Commissioner can either cause a further inquiry to
be made and direct that additional evidence be taken or he may take such
additional evidence himself. Under Section 70-A (2), the Charity Commissioner
cannot exercise his revisional powers during the period of an appeal or in
cases in which an order has been passed either in an appeal filed under
Section 70 or 71 or on an application made under Section 72. Section 72
provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Charity
Commissioner, inter alia, under Section 70 or 70-A or on the questions whether
a trust exists and whether such trust is a public trust or whether any
property is the property of such trust, may apply to the "Court" to set aside
the said decision. Section 294) defines a "Court" to mean in the Greater
Bombay the City Civil and elsewhere, the District Court. Under Section 72
(1-A), no party to an application under Section 72 (1) is entitled to produce
additional evidence, except in the cases mentioned therein. Under Section 72
(4) an appeal lies to the High Court against the decision of the Court as if
such decision was a decree from which appeal ordinarily lies.

13\. Ouster of jurisdiction of the Civil Courts : Section 79 (1) provides>
"Any question whether or not a trust exists and such trust is a public trust
or particular property is the property of such trust, shall be decided by the
Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Charity Commissioner in appeal
as provided by this Act." Under sub-section (2) of that section the decision
of these authorities, unless set aside by the decision of the Court or the
High Court, is "final and conclusive". Under Section 80, "Save as expressly
provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to decide or deal
with any question which is by or under this Act to be decided or dealt with by
any officer or authority under this Act, or in respect of which the decision
or order of such officer or authority has been made final and conclusive." The
word "or" occurring in the last clause of this section just before the words
"in respect of which ................" has been deleted by Maharashtra Act XX
of 1971.

14\. Section 50 to which a reference may be usefully made under this head says
that in any case where it is alleged that there is a breach of a public trust,
or where the direction of the Court is deemed necessary for the administration
of any public trust etc., the Charity Commissioner, or two or more persons
obtained the consent in writing of the Charity Commissioner, may institute a
suit for recovering possession of the property, removal of any trustee, the
appointment of a new trustee, etc.

15\. In the light of these provisions, the first question which we have to
decide is whether the Civil Court has jurisdiction to decide or deal with the
questions raised in Rodabai's suit in regard to her title to the suit property
and in regard to the corresponding lack of power or title in Jamshedji to
convey that property to the trust. In the language of Section 80, the answer
to this question must depend upon whether by or under the Act these questions
are to be decided or dealt with by any officer or authority under the Act and
such decision is made final and conclusive by the Act. The relevant provision
stated as conferring the requisite power being Section 79, the precise point
for determination is whether the aforesaid questions arising in Rodabai's suit
are to be decided or dealt with by the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner on the inquiry under Section 19 and whether the decision of these
questions is made final and conclusive by the Act. If yes, it would be
incompetent to the Civil Court to decide or deal with those questions, because
by Section 80 its jurisdiction that regard is expressly excluded. It must be
stated that in order that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to decide or
deal with a question may be barred under S. 80, it is necessary both that by
or under the Act the particular question has to be decided or dealt with by an
officer or authority under the Act and the decision of such officer or
authority has been made final and conclusive by the Act. The word 'or' which
originally appeared in Section 80 before the last clause "in respect of which
the decision of order .................. has been made final and conclusive"
had evidently crept in through oversight. It has been deleted by Maharashtra
Act XX of 1971, probably, to make clear what was not sufficiently clear.

16\. For deciding whether S. 80 is attracted in a given case, one must
consider what, in substance and not merely in form, is the nature of the claim
made in the suit and the real relief sought therein. If in order to afford
that relief it is necessary for the Court to decide or deal with a question
which by or under the Act is to be decided or dealt with by an officer or
authority appointed under the Act, the Civil Court's jurisdiction in that
behalf is ousted. Such questions must be left to the sole and exclusive
decision of the authorities specified in the Act, whether they are questions
of fact or of law and whether they are simple or complicated. It is true that
ouster of jurisdiction of Civil Courts is not to be readily inferred and the
normal rule is the one contained in Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure
the Civil Courts have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature. But
this rule is subject to the exception contained in that section itself and the
exception is that the cognizance of certain suits by Civil Courts may be
expressly or impliedly barred. Section 80 contains an express provision of
ouster and though its dual conditions must be satisfied strictly before the
decision of a question can be barred from the cognizance of a normal
jurisdiction, it would be wrong to import into that provision any extraneous
or collateral considerations, as for example whether the question involved is
simple or complicated. If law provides that a question must be decided by a
particular authority to the exclusion of the Civil Courts, that authority
cannot throw up its hands in despair and refuse to decide the question on the
ground that it involves consideration of intricate problems. Nor, indeed, can
the Civil Court displace the jurisdiction of that authority by arrogating to
itself the sole power to decide complicated questions. Once the normal
presumption arising under Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code is overborne,
there is no scope for limiting the jurisdiction of an exclusive forum to
simple and straightforward questions. What must therefore be considered here
is whether the two conditions of Section 80 are satisfied.

17\. Turning to that consideration, let us first see what questions are to be
decided or dealt with by the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner in
respect of which the decision is final and conclusive. Under Section 19 (1)
and (2), the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner has to make an inquiry
for the purpose of ascertaining "whether a trust exists and whether such trust
is a public trust" and "whether any property is the property of such trust."
Under Section 21 (2) the entries which the authorities have to make, after the
decision is recorded under Section 20 in the inquiry held under Section 19,
are final and conclusive. Section 79 (1) provides expressly that the question
whether or not a trust exists and such trust is a public trust or particular
property is the property of such trust shall be decided by the Deputy or
Assistant Charity Commissioner and such decision shall be find and conclusive.

18\. The provision of Section 79 are too clear to admit of doubt or difficulty
as regards the description of questions which the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner has to decide or deal with under the Act and in respect of which
the decision is final and conclusive. The next step, however, is fraught with
difficult and that step is to determine the scope and ambit of these
questions. The first of the three questions which the Deputy or Assistant
Charity Commissioner has to decide is "whether or not a trust exists". We find
it impossible to accept the contention of the contesting respondents that all
that is required to be decided under this head is whether in fact a trust is
made and is in existence. The mere production of a deed of trust would in most
cases suffice to furnish an answer to this question, if that be the true
import of that question. In our opinion, what the authorities have to decide
while dealing with the first question is whether the trust is valid and lawful
and can therefore be said to exist. A deed of trust is normally enough proof
of the existence of a trust. But the deed may itself disclose that the author
of the trust is incompetent to contract, being, for example, a minor or that
the object of the trust is unlawful. In such cases, it seems unreasonable to
support that the authorities charged with the duty of conducting inquiries
into public trusts could still come to the conclusion that the "trust exist".
Such trusts can have no existence in the eye of law and it cannot be that a
quasi-judicial authority, like the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner,
could find that a trust created by a person incompetent to contract, or a
trust created for an unlawful purpose "exists". Sections 10 to 13 of the Act
contain provisions regarding "validity of certain public trusts" and regard
must also be had to those provisions in determining whether a trust is valid
so that it can be held to exist.

19\. The second question which the authorities have to decide under Section 79
is whether "such trust is a public trust". The ambit of this inquiry is
indicated by the definition of public trust in Section 2 (13). The authorities
have therefore to satisfy themselves whether a trust which is otherwise lawful
and valid satisfies the requirement of that provision. For determining that
question regard must also be had to the provisions of Section 9 of the Act
which provides as to what purposes are included in the expression "charitable
purpose."

20\. The third question relegated to the decision of the Deputy or Assistant
Charity Commissioner is whether the "particular property is the property of
such trust". This clause is couched in words of doubtful import leading to the
expression of divergent views as regards its scope. Learned Counsel for the
appellant contents for the view that as the question whether the particular
property is the property of the trust cannot be answered without deciding
whether the author of the trust had the right or title to the property
conveyed to the trust, the authorities must decide this latter question and,
indeed, it is their function and duty to decide it. It is urged that questions
of title to the particular property are thus required to be decided in
inquiries under Section 19 and the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to decide
those questions is barred under Section 80. The contesting respondents contend
for the rival view that the question whether the author of the trust had title
to the property conveyed to the trust is outside the scope of the inquiry
under Section 19 and therefore, the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts to decide
or deal with that question is not barred. The learned Government Pleader has
pointed out the merits and demerits of both the views but he has given good
reasons why the contention of the Respondents should be accepted in preference
to that of the appellant. Having considered the matter in all the aspects
presented before us, we are of the opinion that the respondents are right in
their contention. The purpose of the Act, the procedure prescribed in
inquiries under Section 19, the absence of any remedy under the Act to those
who were not parties to the inquiry under Section 19 but whose anterior or
superior title would be concluded by the decided in that inquiry and the
general scheme of the Act, all tend to show that questions of title to the
trust property are outside the scope of the inquiry under Section 19.

21\. The short title of the Act shows that it is "An Act to regulate and to
make better provision for the administration of public religious and
charitable trusts in the State of Bombay". The preamble of the Act is in the
same terms. The statement of Objects and Reasons shows that the then
Government of Bombay had appointed a Committee under the Chairmanship of the
late Mr.Justice Tendolkar "to investigate into the question of the
administration and management of trusts and endowments in the Province of
Bombay for public purposes". Under the terms of reference, the Committee was
directed to investigate into the question of the administration of public,
religious and charitable trusts for the benefit of the Hindu and Jain
Communities with special reference to the prevailing abuses in the
administration of such trusts, measures necessary for removing such abuses,
steps to be taken for an effective supervision, regulation and control of the
administration and management of such trusts etc. The recommendations of the
Committee were accepted by and large, and were embodied in the Act which has
been made applicable to religious and charitable trusts created for the
benefit of all communities. It is thus clear that the dominant purpose of the
Act, is to regulate the administration of public trusts and not to settled
disputed titles to the property alleged to belong to the trust. Towards that
end the Act contains copious provisions in regard to "Accounts and Audit"
(Chapter V), Control over Public Trusts (Chapter VI), Functions and Powers of
Charity Commissioner (Chapter VII) and regarding the Public Trust
Administration Fund (Chapter VIII).

22\. The procedure prescribed by the Act for the conduct of inquiries under
Section 19 is wholly unsuited to a proper and effective adjudication of
disputed titles to the trust property. Under Section 19 the Deputy or
Assistant Charity Commissioner has to conduct an inquiry "in the prescribed
manner". Rule 7 which deals with the manner of inquiries provides that the
procedure prescribed for the trial of the suits under the Presidency Small
Cause Courts Act, 1882 or the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, as the
case may be, would apply to the proceedings under Section 19. Under Section 19
(d) (e), (f) and (g) of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 and under
Item 4 of the Second Schedule of the Provincial Small Cause Courts to decide
questions of title to immovable property is expressly excluded and the
procedure devised for trials under those Acts is consequently far too summary
for a proper adjudication of such titles. The provision in Rule 7 that a party
to an inquiry can appear through an agent and the power of the Tribunal to
exclude lawyers from the inquiries reveal to some extent the narrow nature of
the inquiry envisaged by Section 19.

23\. Rule 11 provides that the officer holding the inquiry may only make a
memorandum of the substance of what each witness deposes. It is unthinkable
that questions of title could be permitted to be decided by a Tribunal finally
and conclusively without any obligation to record the evidence fully. It is
matter of common experience that subtle shades of evidence are often missed in
a memorandum containing merely the substance of the evidence.

24\. Even perhaps of greater importance than these rules is the provision
contained in Rule 7-A. It provides, to the extent material, that on receipt of
an application, the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner shall cause a
public notice to be given calling upon all persons having interest, to submit
their objections. It is significant that until this rule was introduced on
28th December 1967, there was no provision whatsoever in the Act or the Rules
for giving any notice, public or individual to any person before the
commencement of the inquiry under Section 19. The Act was passed on 14th
August 1950 and was made applicable to public trusts on 21st January 1952. For
over 15 years, inquiries under Section 19 could be and were in fact conducted
without issuing any notice to any one whatsoever. It seems to us plain that
such inquiries could not possibly conclude disputed titles. The introduction
of Rule 7-A makes no difference to that position, because it provides for a
public notice only that too, "calling upon all persons having interest", to
submit their objections. State briefly, Section 2 (1) of the Act says that
"person having interest includes" in the case of a temple, persons who are
entitled (for example) to attend it, in the case of a math (for example) the
disciples of the math, in the case of a wake, persons who are entitled to
receive benefits from the wake etc., in the case of a society registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860, a member of the society and in the case
of any other public trust, any beneficiary. The word "includes" which was
substituted in Section 2 (1) for the word "means" by Bombay Act XXVIII of 1953
may show that the definition is not exhaustive but the inclusion of a
particular class of persons only in the definition affords a strong indication
of the scope of the inquiry under Section 19. WE are also not unmindful that
the definition in Section 2 (1) is for the purpose of the Act but normally,
similar expressions used in the Act and the Rules must bear the same meaning.
Section 2 (10) shows that the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner is
expected and required to decide questions raised at the instance of persons
who are interested in the trust. It is no part of their function under Section
19 to decide claims which are adverse to the trust and which are made in
assertion of titles which are hostile to the trust. Such titles cannot be held
concluded in violation of the principles of natural justice.

25\. Neither the Act nor the Rules contemplate that persons who claim
adversely to the trust or who dispute the right or title of the author of the
trust to the trust property must be heard in the inquiry under Section 19. In
fact, Section 19 and R. 7-A (1) only reckon applications under S. 18 which are
to be made by trustees and applications by "any person having interest in a
public trust". Surely, persons in the position of Rodabai and Baimai are not
persons "having interest in a public trust". They are interested in the
assertion of their own private title to the property and in disputing the
right of Jamshedji to convey that property to the trust. We might mention that
in Abdul Karim v. Raipur Municipality, , the Supreme Court held that contested
questions of title did not fall within the scope of inquiry which the
"Registrar" is authorised to hold under S. 5 of the Madhya Pradesh Public
Trust Act, 1951. We cannot , however, draw on that decision as the provisions
of the M. P. Act were different in material respects.

26\. It is urged on behalf of the appellant that if this be the true nature of
the inquiry under Section 19, the decision of it was needless to provide for
an array of remedies against the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner.
Section 70 provides for an appeal to the Charity Commissioner, Section 70-A
confers revisional powers on the Charity Commissioner, Section 72 provides
that an application can be filed to the Court against the decision of the
Charity Commissioner and under sub-section (4) of that section an appeal lies
to the High Court against the decision of the Court. The fact that the
Legislature has expressly provided for these remedies against the decisions
rendered under Section 19 is undoubtedly relevant, because summary decisions
are seldom accorded the privilege of being taken that high. But we are of the
opinion that this circumstance is not sufficient by itself to extend the scope
of the inquiry under Section 19 so as to bring within its sweep contested
questions as regards the title to the trust property.

27\. An speaking of remedies, what is truly important is that the Act provides
no remedy to a person whose title is deemed to have been concluded by the
order of the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner, without affording to
him an opportunity of being heard. The argument is that the decision that a
particular property belongs to the trust involves the determination that it
belongs to no one else and therefore, after the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner records a decision in the inquiry, the Civil Court has no
jurisdiction, in view of Section 80, to decide any question regarding title to
the particular property. It is legitimate to inquire: if Section 80 bars the
suit, does the Act provide a remedy to the aggrieved person, as a self-
contained Code should provide?

28\. Counsel for the appellant contends that Section 22-A provides such a
remedy. But that, in our opinion is reading far too much in that section. It
provides that if at any time after the entries are made in the register it
appears to the Deputy or Assistant Commissioner that "any particular relating
to any public trust, which was not the subject-matter of the inquiry under
Section 19 ................ has remained to be inquired into", a further
inquiry may be made in the prescribed manner. The pre-condition of this
section is that a particular relating to a public trust must have remained to
be inquired into. This must mean that an particular which could have been
inquired into by the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner has remained to
be inquired into. That takes one back to Section 19 which speaks of a
trustee's application under Section 18, or an application by a "person having
interest in a public trust". Rule 7-A (1) uses similar language and 7-A (1)
(b) says that "all persons having interest" to submit their objections shall
be called upon to do so by a copy of the public notice affixed on the board of
the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner. If the Act and the Rules thus
contemplate in terms that the inquiry must be limited to the contentions of
persons interested in the trust, there is no place in that inquiry for a
person who wants to set up a title which is hostile to the trust. Such a claim
is not a "particular relating to" the public trust, nor can it be said that it
"has remained to be inquired into".

29\. Section 18 (5) and Rule 6 prescribe the "particulars" which the
application under Section 18 (1) must contain. These provisions show that what
has to be disclosed in the application is matters in which the trust is
interested, matters which are necessary to know for the purpose of
registration of the trust, so that its affairs can properly be regulated and
administered. Section 18 (5) provides that the application shall by way of
particulars set out the name of the trust, the names and addresses of the
trustees, the mode of succession to the office of the trustee, the list of
property belonging to the trust, etc. Rule 6 provides that in addition to
these particulars, the application shall also contain particulars regarding
documents creating the trust, objects of the trust, sources of its income,
encumbrances on the trust property and particulars as to title deeds
pertaining to the trust property. All these are matters pertaining to the
trust property in which the trust and the trustees are interested. Facts
pertaining to the history of title to the trust property to not find a place
in these provisions, because they do not constitute particulars in the sense
in which that word is used in Section 18 95) and Rule 6. The use of the
expression "another particulars" in Section 19 (viii) does not through much
light on this question, because what is mentioned in the preceding clauses of
Section 19 is partly what is to be ascertained in the inquiry and every one of
the preceding seven clauses cannot necessarily be deemed to be a "particular".

30\. A learned Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court - the late Mr. Justice
M. R. Mody - has held in Ishwarlal Nanalal v. Ghanchi Chimanlal R., ILR (1963)
4 Guj 767 that decisions given under the Bombay Public Trusts Act the effect
of a judgment in rem and that Section 22-A of the Act casts an obligation on
the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner to hold a further inquiry if the
claim of any third party is left out of consideration in a previous inquiry
under Section 19. With respect, we are unable to agree with this view. The
inadequate procedure prescribed for inquiries under Section 19, the absence of
any provision for the issuance of a notice to those whose interests are likely
to be affected by a decision rendered in that inquiry and the dominant purpose
of the Act that public trusts should be compulsorily registrable so that they
can be more effectively regulated and administered show that contests
regarding titles of third parties have no place in the scheme of the Act. With
respect, we also see no support for the proposition that decisions given under
Section 19 are judgments in rem. Section 41 of the Evidence Act does not
accord that pride of place to such summary decisions. Mody J., it must be
stated, has not considered the whole scheme of the Act. He says "I would have
had to consider the whole scheme of the Act had I not been fortunate enough to
find a judgment of our own Court reported in Kuberbhai Shivdas v. Mahant
Purshottamdas Kalyandas, (161) 2 Guj LR 564." That is a judgment of Shelat, J.
which involved different considerations altogether. There, the learned Judge
was concerned to determine whether in view of Section 20, the Civil Court had
jurisdiction to decide a suit by which plaintiffs asked for a declaration that
certain properties belonged to the public trust for a change in the mode of
succession to the office of the trustee, for removal of one of the defendants
as a trustee, for appointment of new trustees and for settlement of a scheme.
Plaintiffs participated in the inquiry under Section 19 and went in appeal to
the Charity Commissioner against the decision of the Assistant Charity
Commissioner. Thereafter they filed suit for obtaining the reliefs mentioned
above. Shelat, J., held that a complete code is provided by the Act for
dealing with matters set out in Sections 18 and 19 and that the provisions of
Section 80 bar the jurisdiction of Civil Courts in the two categories of
matters, namely, (1) those questions left under the Act to be decided by the
Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner under Sections 18 and 19, and (2)
those which the Act has made final and conclusive under Section 79 (1) and
Section 21 (2) of the Act. The question whether titles of third parties can be
adjudicated upon in an inquiry under Section 19 was not before the learned
Judge.

31\. Mody, J., has also down on the judgment of Shelat, J., for determining
the scope of Section 22-A. But all that was said in Kuberbhai's case. (1961) 2
Guj LR 564 is that the word "particular" mentioned in Section 22A would mean
any information or detail as to a trust which has not been considered in a
previous inquiry under Section 19. This observation would not justify the
conclusion to which Mody, J., came that a claim of a third party to the trust
property can be inquired into under Section 22-A if it was not previously
considered in the inquiry held under Section 19.

32\. The appellant contends that quite apart from Section 22-A, Section 70-A
provides an adequate remedy to a third party whose title is affected by the
decision of the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner. This submission also
lacks substance. Revisional powers are always discretionary and the power
conferred by Section 70-A on the Charity Commissioner is no exception to that
rule. Besides, a third party may find himself in a quandary if a party to the
proceeding under S. 19 has filed party to the proceeding under S. 19 has filed
an appeal under Section 70 or an application under S. 72 and orders have been
passed in those proceedings. Sub-section (2) (b) of Section 70-A provides that
in such cases the Charity Commissioner cannot exercise his revisional powers.

33\. The contention that a tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction also possesses
the right to decide questions which are incidental to the determination of the
main question does not carry the matter any further. The question as regards
the title of a third party to the trust property is not be any means a
question incidental to the determination of the main question whether the
particular property is the property of the public trust.

34\. Counsel for the appellant has drawn our attention to decisions under the
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, one of which is reported in
Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab v. Jafran Begum, . The parallel of
decisions under that Act is, in our opinion, not opposite. Section 2(f) of
that Act defines "evacuee property" to mean any property of an evacuee whether
held by him as owner or as a trustee or as a beneficiary or as a tenant or in
any other capacity and includes any property which has been obtained by any
person from an evacuee after 14th August, 1947. Section 7 of that Act empowers
the Custodian to give notice, where he is of opinion that certain property is
evacuee property, to the person interested and after holding such inquiry into
the matter as the circumstances of the case permit, pass an order declaring
any such property to be evacuee property. Section 28 of that Act provides that
every order made by the Custodian and certain other officers shall be final
and Section 46, with which the Supreme Court, was particularly concerned,
provides that no civil or revenue Court, save as otherwise expressly provided
in that Act, would have jurisdiction to entertain or adjudicate upon any
question whether any property or any right to or interest in any property is
or is not in evacuee property or in respect of any matter which the Custodian-
General or that Custodian is empowered by or under that Act to determine. On a
consideration of these provisions and the entire scheme of the Act, the
Supreme Court held that the Act was a complete code in itself in the matter of
dealing with evacuee property. Wanchoo, C. J., who spoke for the Court, refers
to an earlier decision of the Supreme Court in Ram Gopal Reddy v. Addl.
Custodian vacuee Property, in which it was held that the Evacuee Act "provides
a complete machinery for a person interested in any property to put forward
his claim before the authorities competent to deal with the question and to go
in appeal or in revision if the person interested feels aggrieved. Having
provided this complete machinery for adjudication of all claims with respect
to evacuee property, the Act by Section 46, bars the jurisdiction of civil or
revenue Courts to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any
property or any right to or interest in any property is or is not evacuee
property." We have pointed out that the Act is not a elf-contained Code and
provides no remedy to third parties whose titles would be concluded by the
decision under Section 19.

35\. That may serve to explain the intendment of Section 26 under which any
Court of competent jurisdiction deciding any question relating to any public
trust, which by or under the provisions of the Act it is not expressly or
impliedly barred from deciding, has to send copy of such decision to the
Charity Commissioner and the Charity Commissioner has to cause the entries in
the registrar to be made or amended in accordance with such decision. If a
civil Court upholds the title of a third party to the property, which under
Section 19 has been found to belong to the trust, the record of the Charity
Commissioner has to be amended so as to accord with that decision. In the
instant case, therefore, the decision of Civil Court in Rodabai's suit will
have priority over the decision recorded in the inquiry under Section 19.

36\. It remains now to consider the decisions of this Court which have led to
this reference. In Taraben Baldevdas v. Charity Commr., (1995) 57 Bom LR 1069
the petitioner had filed a suit in a Civil Court against the respondents for
declaration that she was the owner of a certain sum of money lying in deposit
with the respondents and that no one else had any right, title or interest in
that sum. A preliminary issue was raised whether the suit was bared by Section
80 of the Act. During the pendency of the suit, respondents submitted an
application to the Deputy Charity Commissioner for determining whether the sum
lying in deposit with them constituted a trust and whether the trust was a
public trust within the meaning of the Act. The petitioner raised a
preliminary contention that the Deputy Charity Commissioner had no
jurisdiction to entertain the application as the question relating to the
existence of the trust was involved in the suit. That contention having been
rejected, the petitioner applied under Section 10 of the Civil Procedure Code,
for stay of the proceedings before the Deputy Charity Commissioner. A division
bench of this Court (Bavdekar and J. C. Shah, JJ.) held that as the Civil
Court had no jurisdiction to decide the question whether the sum in the hands
of the respondents was the property of the public trust, the application
before the Deputy Charity Commissioner could not be stayed.

37\. Shah, J., who delivered the judgment of the Bench examined the scheme of
the Act and observed; "Now, jurisdiction of such amplitude having been
conferred under the Act upon the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner or
the Charity Commissioner to decide questions set out in Section 19, and
jurisdiction of the Civil Courts having been simultaneously excluded, it would
be difficult to hold that the civil court has jurisdiction to decide the same
questions over again in a civil suit." It was urged that if that be the true
view of the matter, the title of a person may be lost by a conclusive
determination even though he has had no opportunity of being heard. This
contention was expressly left open, as it was unnecessary to decide it. The
decision therefore is not an authority for the proposition that titles of
third parties can be held concluded by the decision recorded in the inquiry
under section 19. The decision however proceeds on the basis that a contest on
title is within the purview of that inquiry and to that extent the decision,
with very great respect, is not correct. A provision of ouster like the one
contained in Section 80 does not depend for its application upon whether the
person who raises the particular question in the suit was or was not a party
to the proceeding before the tribunal in which the exclusive jurisdiction to
decide that question is vested. the decision whether the trial of a question
is barred under Section 80 depends on whether that question is to be decided
by the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner. If the question is outside
the pale of the inquiry envisaged by Section 19, the Civil Courts would have
jurisdiction to decide or deal with the question. Evidently, the various
considerations which have been presented before us were not placed before the
learned Judges who decided Taraben's Case.

38\. The decision of Chitale, J. in Shri Adinath Tirthankar Jain Mandir v.
Shri Shantappa Dada Madnaik, , that "a person who was not a party to the
proceedings under the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, but finds that his
property is registered as trust property pursuant to the said proceedings, is
not precluded under Sections 79 and 80 of the Act from filing a suit for
declaration of his title to such property in a Civil Court", is with respect
correct, but we must add that the same result would follow whether the person
who raises the question regarding his title to the property was or was not a
party to the proceedings under Section 19. The question of ouster under
Section 80 has to be decided by applying an objective test : Is the particular
question one which by or under the Act is to be decided or dealt with the
Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner and is his decision made final and
conclusive by the Act?

39\. In First Appeal No. 353 of 1960 decided on 19-11-1962 (Bom), Patel and K.
K. Desai, JJ., were dealing with a matter in which the 1st appellant had made
an application under S. 18 of the Act for registration of a trust. The inquiry
into that application related to the question whether a certain land belonged
to a public trust. Against the decision that the land was the property of the
trust, respondents 1 and 2 filed an appeal to the Charity Commissioner and
thereafter an application to the District Court under Section 72 of the Act.
The learned District Judge set aside the decision of the Deputy Charity
Commissioner and directed that respondents 1 and 2 should be allowed to file
their written statement and lead evidence in support of their contentions.
Their case was that the title to the property was vested in them. After
referring to the decision in Taraben's case, , Patel, J., observes :

"................ It is difficult, however, to assert that the Charity
Commissioners have got exclusive jurisdiction where titles of third parties
may be involved. While requiring them to decide statutory issues, if facility
were to be attached to certain matters, we would be permitting them indirectly
to decide very complicated and important questions of fact of heredity and
legitimate as well, which, in all probability, in view of the wording of
Section 19, may not have been intended. Even apart from this, the procedure,
prescribed is also a summary procedure, which is highly unsuited to any
inquiry about the titles of third persons ...................."

These observations are really obiter, because ultimately the learned Judges
dismissed the appeal with a direction that the Assistant Charity Commissioner
should decide the issues framed by the learned District Judge. The use of
expressions "in all probability" and "may not have been intended" also shown
that the particular question was not considered and decided. We would,
however, like to add that if a tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction to decide a
question, it is irrelevant that the question is of a complicated nature. AS
held by Gatne, J., Jankibai Prahaladrai v. Kashinath, , if a question falls
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Deputy or Assistant Charity
Commissioner, it is not open to him to refer the parties to the civil Court on
the ground that the question is complicated.

40\. For these reasons, our answer to the first question is in the negative.

41\. As regards questions 2 and 3, we are of the opinion that for determining
whether the bar under Section 80 of the Act arises, it is irrelevant whether
the person who wants to raise the particular question under Section 19. The
fact that such a person was a party to those proceedings may, perhaps, raise a
bar analogous to that of res judicata but we are not concerned with that
question and would prefer not to express any opinion thereon. The Civil Court
would, however, have the jurisdiction to decide the points mentioned in
question No.1, in the sense that Section 80 cannot operate as a bar to that
jurisdiction.

42\. The papers may be sent back to the learned Single Judge for disposal of
the appeal.

43\. Reference answered accordingly.

