

Delhi High Court

Atlas Cycles (Haryana) Ltd. vs Atlas Products Pvt. Ltd. on 8 August, 2007

Equivalent citations: 146 (2008) DLT 274, MIPR 2007 (3) 57, 2008 (36) PTC 269
Del

Author: V Sen

Bench: V Sen, S Bhayana

JUDGMENT Vikramajit Sen, J.

Page 2126

1\. These two Appeals have been heard together as per the request of learned
Counsel for the parties. The Appellant is the Plaintiff; the Respondents in
the Appeals are the Defendants in the Suit. FAO (OS) 395/2002 is directed
against the decision of the Learned Single Judge in IA No. 4197/2002 in Suit
No. 882/2002, passed on September 27, 2002. The operative part of the Order
reads as follows:

Consequently, I restrain the defendants from using the trade mark 'House of
Atlas' or any other mark which may be deceptively similar to the plaintiff's
trade mark 'Atlas', in respect of bicycles and bicycle parts till the disposal
of the suit. However, there will be no injunction in respect of its user as
the corporate name of the first defendant.

2\. FAO(OS) 280/2003 assails the Orders dated May 30, 2003 passed by the
learned Single Judge in IA No. 9431/2002 in Suit No. 882/2002, of which the
operative part reads as follows:

11\. The public notices issued by the respondent do not in any way give an
impression to the public at large or their dealers that Court has permitted
them to use the word Atlas as their trade mark but it is a notice to the
public that henceforth they will sell their goods under the trade mark Premier
Gold manufactured by Atlas Products Pvt.Ltd, it being their corporate name.
The public notice though do not carry that part of the order which was against
the respondents, but it does not in any manner have any prejudicial effect on
the plaintiff.

12\. As the defendants have been permitted to use it as their corporate name
and they are using the same as their corporate name only and not as a trade
name no fresh orders are to the contrary required to be passed on this
application, defendants being already under injunction from using the trade
mark "Atlas" of course with the explicit permission to use it as their
corporate name. The application is disposed of accordingly.

FACTS AND CONTENTIONS

3\. Mr. Sudhir Chandra, learned Senior counsel appearing for the Plaintiffs
has submitted that the trade mark "Atlas" has been registered in favor of the
Plaintiff since 1952. The Plaintiff asserts that it has over a quarter of the
market share in the sale of cycles in India. It is not in dispute that
Defendant No. 1, namely, Atlas Products Pvt. Ltd. was incorporated under the
Companies Act in 1995. It is also not in dispute that Defendant No. 1 had
commenced the manufacture of cycles in February 2002. According to the
Plaintiffs, immediately upon learning of this event, they filed Suit No.
882/2002 praying for a permanent injunction restraining infringement of trade
mark, infringement of copyright, rendition of accounts of profit, delivery-up
etc. Page 2127 Mr. Chandra submits that it is the Plaintiff's case that prior
to 2002 the Defendant No. 1 was not engaged in any cycle-related business and
that being so, the Plaintiffs found no reason or cause to object to the use of
the word "Atlas" in the corporate or trade name. It is only when the
manufacture of cycles by the Defendant, under the trade mark "House of Atlas"
commenced and was learnt of by the Plaintiffs in early 2002 that the
compulsion to file the subject Suit had arisen. Mr. Chandra has further
submitted that the learned Single Judge had erred in coming to the conclusion
that the Plaintiff had acquiesced in the Defendant's inclusion of "Atlas" in
its corporate name. Even if some agreement had been reached between the three
branches of the family, it could not be foisted on the Plaintiff which is a
separate and distinct legal entity. He argues that the relevant date for
reckoning whether there was any acquiescence and knowledge on the part of the
Plaintiff is February 2002, the month in which manufacture of cycles was
started by the Defendants and, therefore, inasmuch as the present Suit was
filed in April 2002 it cannot possibly be held that there was any delay or
acquiescence on the part of the Plaintiff. It is primarily on similar lines
that Mr. Chandra has also contended that the learned Single Judge fell into an
error, which has far-reaching consequences to the Plaintiffs, in concluding
that the Defendant's conduct was not dishonest in adopting "Atlas" in the
corporate name or trade mark. He has vehemently argued that if February 2002
is taken as the appropriate date for the purposes of the present litigation
then there is no scope for holding that there was open and concurrent user
such as would disentitle the Plaintiff from seeking an injunction against the
Defendants even in respect of its corporate name. Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, learned
Senior counsel, who also appears on behalf of the Plaintiffs has reiterated
this factual matrix.

4\. Mr. Chetpat Aryama Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
the Defendants/Respondents, has emphasized upon the fact that the Defendants
have not filed any Appeal against the Order of the learned Single Judge and
that they are not violating those Orders. He has underscored that the
Defendant has adopted the corporate name Atlas Products Pvt. Ltd. since
August, 1995 without any demur or remonstration from the Plaintiff. According
to him, a perusal of the prayer contained in the Plaint would amplify that no
challenge had been laid to the Defendant's corporate name, so long as it was
not employed in respect of bicycle and bicycle parts or in any other manner
which would result in infringing the Plaintiff's trade mark. He has relied on
the Memorandum of Understanding dated 8th January, 1999, executed between the
three groups of the corporate family. Our attention has been drawn to the
second recital thereof which speaks of "growth of family during the
subsistence of complete amity between all members of the family". After taking
note of the growth of the family, it records that "it is considered prudent to
split the ownership management and/or control of the companies and the assets
in three equal shares and to allot each share to the three units of the
family". He has relied on Clause 2 of the MoU which contemplates the division
of the assets in three equal lots in such a manner that one cycle unit falls
to the share of each of the three groups, each cycle unit being more or less
equal. In response to an Objection taken on behalf Page 2128 of the
Plaintiffs, he has further relied on the Minutes of the Meeting of the Board
of Directors of the Plaintiff held in the family home of the Kapurs on
30.8.2000 whereat the Board took note of the MoU entered into between the
three families; and Order passed by the Arbitrator on 28-8-2000. Mr. Sundaram
contends that a reading of the Minutes leaves no scope for arguing that the
MoU had been entered into between the three branches of the Kapoor family, the
terms of which are not binding on the Plaintiff, which is a duly incorporated
company and thus an independent and distinct legal entity. He has also read
the Replication filed in the Suit which according to him makes portions of it
abundantly clear that the Plaintiff had full knowledge of the arbitration
between the three families. Furthermore, he has argued that there are other
family companies which have also used the word name "Atlas" in their corporate
names, without any demur or objection from the Plaintiffs. The Memorandum of
Association of Atlas Exim Private Limited, incorporated in May 1994, is
available on the records and in its Objects III (C) 5 and 38 'cycle and cycle
parts' is mentioned. Reference has also been made to Atlas Global Private
Limited of which business of "bicycles and accessories" is one of the main
objects. Mr. Sundaram further contends that once it is found that the
Plaintiffs have not objected to the Defendant's corporate name, then the
normal incidence of such a name must be freely allowed. Reliance has also been
placed on Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 which requires the name
of the manufacturer to be clearly mentioned on each product. It would,
therefore, be inequitable and unfair to prohibit the Defendant from
functioning in their corporate name after several years of its existence.
Reliance has also been placed on Section 22 of the Companies Act, 1956 which
was introduced by Act 47 of 1999, setting down a limitation of five years
within which any interested party can launch an attack on the use of any
particular corporate name keeping the Trade Marks Act, 1999 in the background.

SCOPE OF APPELLATE INTERFERENCE IN INTERLOCUtorY ORDERS

5\. We would be committing a grievous and unpardonable error if we fail to
keep in mind that it is an interim Order which is under challenge before us.
Interim Orders are always subject to change or modification at the final stage
of the suits. The ambit of interference by appellate Courts has been
succinctly demarcated in the following passage from U.P. Coop. Federation Ltd.
v. Sunder Bros. :

8\. It is well established that where the discretion vested in the court under
Section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act has been exercised by the lower court
the appellate court should be slow to interfere with the exercise of that
discretion. In dealing with the matter raised before it at the appellate stage
the appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the
exercise of the discretion under appeal solely on the ground that it had
considered the matter at the trial stage it may have come to a contrary
conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the trial court reasonably
and in a judicial manner Page 2129 the fact that the appellate court would
have taken a different view may not justify interference with the trial
court's exercise of discretion. As is often said, it is ordinarily not open to
the appellate court to substitute its own exercise of discretion for that of
the trial Judge; but if it appears to the appellate court that in exercising
its discretion the trial court has acted unreasonably or capriciously or has
ignored relevant facts then it would certainly be open to the appellate court
to interfere with the trial court's exercise of discretion. This principle is
well established; but, as has been observed by Viscount Simon, L.C., in
Charles Osenton and Co. v. Johnston AC at p. 138:

The law as to the reversal by a court of appeal of an order made by a Judge
below in the exercise of his discretion is well established, and any
difficulty that arises is due only to the application of well-settled
principles in an individual case.

This passage has been reiterated in Manjunath Anandappa URF Shivappa Hanasi .

6\. In Wander Ltd. v. Antox India P. Ltd. 1990 (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 727
their Lordships had analysed the powers of the Appellate Court in such matters
as follows - "The appellate court will not interfere with the exercise of
discretion of the court of first instance and substitute its own discretion
except where the discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily,
or capriciously or perversely or where the court had ignored the settled
principles of law regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. An
appeal against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on principle.
Appellate court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a conclusion
different from the one reached by the court below if the one reached by that
court was reasonably possible on the material. The appellate court would
normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise of discretion under
appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered the matter at the trial
stage it would have come to a contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been
exercised by the trial court reasonably and in a judicial manner the fact that
the appellate court would have taken a different view may not justify
interference with the trial court's exercise of discretion". This decision has
been followed very recently in Seema Arshad Zaheer v. Municipal Corporation of
Greater Mumbai . The City Civil Court had granted a temporary injunction
against the Corporation which was challenged before the Bombay High Court.
Speaking for the Bench His Lordship R.V. Raveendran made the following pithy
observations:

32\. Where the lower court acts arbitrarily, capriciously or perversely in the
exercise of its discretion, the appellate court Page 2130 will interfere.
Exercise of discretion by granting a temporary injunction when there is "no
material", or refusing to grant a temporary injunction by ignoring the
relevant documents produced, are instances of action which are termed as
arbitrary, capricious or perverse. When we refer to acting on "no material"
(similar to "no evidence"), we refer not only to cases where there is total
dearth of material, but also to cases where there is no relevant material or
where the material, taken as a whole, it is not reasonably capable of
supporting the exercise of discretion. In this case, there was "no material"
to make out a prima facie case and therefore, the High Court in its appellate
jurisdiction, was justified in interfering in the matter and vacating the
temporary injunction granted by the trial court.

7\. Very recently in Ramdev Food Products (P) Ltd. v. Arvindbhai Rambhai Patel
the Supreme Court has taken into consideration both Wander Ltd. and Seema
Arshad Zaheer. His Lordship, S.B. Sinha, J., has perspicuously dealt with this
issue in these words:

The grant of an interlocutory injunction is in exercise of discretionary power
and hence, the appellate courts will usually not interfere with it. However,
the appellate courts will substitute their discretion if they find that
discretion has been exercised arbitrarily, capriciously, perversely, or where
the court has ignored the settled principles of law regulating the grant or
refusal of interlocutory injunctions. This principle has been stated by this
Court time and time again. [See for example Wander Ltd. v. Antox India P. Ltd.
1990 (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 727, Laxmikant V. Patel v. Chetanbhai Shah and
Seema Arshad Zaheer v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai ].

The appellate court may not reassess the material and seek to reach a
conclusion different from the one reached by the court below if the one
reached by that court was reasonably possible on the material. The appellate
court would normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise of
discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered the
matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary conclusion.
However, in this case the courts below proceeded on a prima facie
misconstruction of documents. They adopted and applied wrong standards. We,
therefore, are of the opinion that a case for interference has been made out.

Page 2131

8\. The operative part of the impugned Order dated 27.9.2002 has been
reproduced above. The Defendants have not challenged the Order and it,
therefore, attains ad interim finality till such time as it is altered.
FAO(OS) No. 395/2002 challenges the refusal to pass an injunction in respect
of the corporate name of Defendant No. 1. We have to satisfy ourselves that,
keeping in perspective the material available before the learned Single Judge,
he had exercised his discretion to grant an ad interim injunction in a manner
which cannot be labelled as arbitrary or capricious or perverse, or in
ignorance of or contrary to the settled principles of law regulating the grant
or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. In this regard, the learned Single
Judge had compared the two trade marks as a whole and found a deceptive
resemblance between the Plaintiff's mark "Atlas" and the Defendant's mark
"House of Atlas" and accordingly concluded that the Defendant should be
restrained from using the offending trade mark "House of Atlas". The Trial
Court had also returned the finding that so far as the offending mark was
concerned the plea of acquiescence had not been made out. This portion of the
verdict has not been challenged by the Defendant, but we are adverting to it
in order to highlight the clear segregation of the two aspects, namely, trade
mark on the one hand and trade name and corporate name on the other, was ever
present in the mind of the Trial Court. The violation to the trade name was
found to have arisen in 2002 [and this is not in debate at all]. However,
dealing with the trade or corporate name the learned Single Judge took note of
the incorporation of Defendant No. 1 on 21.8.1995. On the basis of the
material before him the learned Single Judge came to the prima facie
conclusion that the Kapoor family, under whose umbrella the Plaintiff No. 1
falls, had knowledge of the incorporation of Defendant No. 1.

LEGAL REGIME FOR COMPETING USER OF TRADE MARKS AND TRADE NAMES

9\. We shall first analyze what the law is on the subject of corporate name or
trade name. This has been recently expounded by the Supreme Court in Ramdev
which is the Restatement of the law on this complex nodus. A partnership,
presumably of a patriarch and his three sons, was transacting business in the
name and style of Ramdev Masala Stores and was the owner of the trade mark
Ramdev masala. The partnership later on reconstituted and incorporated itself
into Ramdev Food Products Pvt. Ltd. to which the trade mark together with the
goodwill was eventually assigned. The firm was dissolved in November, 1991,
but the three brothers continued to partake in the spice/masala business
through firms named Ramdev Exports and Ramdev Masala which transacted retail
sale including trading through seven outlets/stores. A 'User agreement' was
executed permitting the said firm to use the trade mark, subject to certain
conditions, till 31.3.1998. On the inevitable outbreak of disputes between the
three brothers differences were attempted to be resolved between them on terms
reduced into a Memorandum of Understanding. These terms principally were that
the Respondents were permitted to sell products of the Plaintiff through their
retail outlets. The rapprochement proved to be stillborn as evidenced by the
filing of a civil suit by the Company against the others, which was
substantially decreed. The Trial Court held that the Plaintiff Company Page
2132 was the owner of the trade mark; the Defendants could not be permitted to
start manufacturing and marketing spices/masalas via a deceptively similar
trade mark as it would create confusion in the minds of the consumers.
However, the Defendants were granted liberty to manufacture spices/masalas in
their factory and sell them in the seven outlets under the trade mark 'Ramdev
Masala'. However, the Defendants were not permitted to employ the words
"Ramdev Masala" on the packaging of their goods marketed under the mark
'Swad', as the packaging would become deceptively similar and hence infringe
the Plaintiff's trade mark 'Ramdev Masala'. It was the last finding of the
Trial Court that was reversed by the High Court. This was so held also for the
reason that statutory requirements had to be complied with, but it was
clarified that the principal display panel would state "Swad", and "Ramdev
Masala" could only be written on the bottom of the reverse side.

10\. The Supreme Court affirmed the finding that the Memorandum of
Understanding did not bestow any manufacturing rights on Arvindbhai
(Defendant) and the trade mark belonged exclusively to the Company. After
analysing the characteristics of trade marks and acquiescence, and the
principles of interpretation of documents in the context of the Memorandum of
Understanding, their Lordships directed that -

ORIGINAL

134\. We, in view of our findings aforementioned, direct:

(i) The respondents be restrained from using the trade mark including the
trade name 'Ramdev Masala' in any of their products.

(ii) They may, however, carry on their business in any other name insofar as
manufacturing of spices is concerned.

(iii) The appellant shall, as and when demands are made, supply spices
produced by it for retail sale thereof to several outlets belonging to
respondents on usual terms, and in respect of such articles on the
labels/pouches, on the reverse thereof, the following shall be mentioned in
the minimum permissible size in terms of the provisions of Weights and
Measures Act and Prevention of Food Adulteration Act:

This product is manufactured and marketed by M/s. Ramdev Masala (Arvindbhai
Group) (Or M/s. Ramdev Exports Arvindbhai Group) having no relationship
whatsoever with Ramdev Food Products Pvt. Ltd.

(iv) The appellant shall deposit a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs before the Trial Court
or furnish a bank guarantee for the said sum by way of security.

(v) Despite pending applications for rectification before the Registrar of
Trade Marks, the final hearing of Civil Suit No. 828 of 2000 shall be
expedited and the learned Trial Judge is hereby directed to complete the
hearing as expeditiously as possible preferably within a period of six months
from the date of communication of this order.

Page 2133 AFTER REVIEW

132\. We, in view of our findings aforementioned, direct:

(i) The respondents be restrained from using the trade mark including the
trade name "Ramdev Masala" in any of their products.

(ii) They may, however, carry on their business in any other name insofar as
manufacturing of spices is concerned and in respect of such articles on the
labels/pouches on the reverse thereof, the following shall be mentioned in the
minimum permissible size in terms of the provisions of the Standards of
Weights and Measures Act and the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act:

This product is manufactured and marketed by M/s. Ramdev Masala (Arvindbhai
Group) having no relationship whatsoever with Ramdev Food Products Pvt. Ltd.

(iii) The appellant shall, as and when demands are made, supply spices
produced by it for retail sale thereof from the seven outlets belonging to
Respondent 7 on usual terms.

(iv) The appellant shall deposit a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs before the Trial Court
or furnish a bank guarantee for the said sum by way of security.

(v) Despite pending applications for rectification before the Registrar of
Trade Marks, the final hearing of Civil Suit No. 828 of 2000 shall be
expedited and the learned Trial Judge is hereby directed to complete the
hearing as expeditiously as possible preferably within a period of six months
from the date of communication of this order.

11\. Their Lordships expounded the law in these words:

A trade mark is the property of the manufacturer. The purpose of a trade mark
is to establish a connection between the goods and the source thereof which
would suggest the quality of goods. If the trade mark is registered,
indisputably the user thereof by a person who is not otherwise authorised to
do so would constitute infringement. Section 21 of the 1958 Act provides that
where an application for registration is filed, the same can be opposed.
Ordinarily under the law and, as noticed hereinbefore, there can only be one
mark, one source or one proprietor. Ordinarily again right to user of a trade
mark cannot have two origins. The first respondent herein is a rival trader of
the appellant-company. It did not in law have any right to use the said trade
mark, save and except by reason of the terms contained in the MOU or
continuous user. It is well settled that when defenses in regard to right of
user are set up, the onus would be on the person who has taken the said plea.
It is equally well settled that a person cannot use a mark which would be
deceptively similar to that of the registered trade mark. Registration of
trade marks is envisaged to remove any confusion in the minds of the
consumers. If, thus, goods are sold which are produced from two sources, the
same may lead to confusion in the mind of the consumers. In a given situation,
it may also amount to fraud on the public. A proprietor of a registered trade
mark indisputably Page 2134 has a statutory right thereto. In the event of
such use by any person other than the person in whose name the trade mark is
registered, he will have a statutory remedy in terms of Section 21 of the 1958
Act. Ordinarily, therefore, two people are not entitled to the same trade
mark, unless there exists an express license in that behalf.

...

Traditionally, a trade mark has always been considered a vital and inseparable
part of the goodwill of the business. In fact, the sale of a trade mark
without the sale of the goodwill to the same buyer is considered null and
void. However, the trade mark can be assigned with or without the goodwill of
business though subject to certain conditions. [See V.A. Mohta's Trade Marks,
Passing Off and Franchising, pages 12, 313.] ...

...So long the parties to an arrangement can continue to carry out their
respective businesses without infringing the right of another, indisputably
the terms thereof must be given effect to. But the matter would be entirely
different when a party who has not been expressly authorised to manufacture
the goods in which the Company had been carrying on business under the same
name, the respondents under law could not have been permitted to carry on the
manufacturing and marketing of their products under the same name. In a case
of this nature, even a mandatory injunction can be granted.

...

By reason of interpretation of MOU, trade mark cannot be infringed and further
when the right of user has been relinquished, the same could not have been
claimed by the respondents.

...

Waiver may sometimes resemble a form of election, and sometimes be based on
ordinary principles of estoppel. [See 45 Halsbury's Laws (4th edn.) para 1269]
...

Mr. Nariman is also not correct in contending that only a label has been
registered and not the name 'Ramdev'. Definition of 'mark' as contained in
Section 2(j) of the 1958 Act also includes name, signature, etc. ...

Although, the defendant may not be using the actual trade mark of the
plaintiff, the get up of the defendant's goods may be so much like the
plaintiff's that a clear case of passing off could be proved. It is also
possible that the defendant may be using the plaintiff's mark, the get up of
the defendant's goods may be so different from the get up of the plaintiff's
goods and the prices also may be so different that there would be no
probability of deception of the public. However, in an infringement action, an
injunction would be issued if it is proved that the defendant is improperly
using the plaintiff's mark. In an action for infringement where the
defendant's trade mark is identical with the plaintiff's mark, the Court will
not enquire whether the infringement is such as is likely to deceive or cause
confusion. The test, therefore, is as to likelihood of Page 2135 confusion or
deception arising from similarity of marks is the same both in infringement
and passing off actions. [See Ruston and Hornsby Ltd. v. The Zamindara
Engineering Co. .

...

Acquiescence is a facet of delay. The principle of acquiescence would apply
where: (i) sitting by or allowing another to invade the rights and spending
money on it; (ii) it is a course of conduct inconsistent with the claim for
exclusive rights for trade mark, trade name, etc....

In P.M. Diesels Ltd. v. Patel Field Marshal Agencies and Ors. 2001 PTC 20
(Del), the High Court noticed the distinction between logo, trade mark and
trade name and was of the view that the defendants cannot be permitted to use
the trade name so as to defeat the other portion of the order of injunction
already passed against him. An injunction can also be granted against the
respondents to use the corporate name.

12\. We have extensively reproduced extract from Ramdev for the reason that
the facts are extraordinarily similar to the present case and therefore its
reasoning and operative conclusions can be and must be extrapolated to the
dispute before us. So far as the source of the corporate or trade name is
concerned, in both cases it originates from the common business that the
family had pursued masala/spices under the trade mark Ramdev Masala in Ramdev
and 'Atlas' cycles in the present case. There cannot be two opinions on the
question that, in the interests of the public/consumer, confusion as to the
source of the products should not be permitted to persist. Indeed, this should
be the primary concern of the Court. Law protects trade marks to enable a
consumer to rest assured that the product on which he has placed his
preference, and which he identifies by its name, is in fact the one which he
has purchased. From the standpoint of the manufacturer, his entire purpose is
the sale of his product; this cannot be achieved if some other manufacturer
can by clever manipulations and machinations, deceive or confuse the customer
into buying a product that he does not intend to buy. It is for this reason
that we feel that the protection must principally be from the customers'
perspective. This is what the manufacturer/seller would want. In this case,
therefore, the Court must ensure, by injunctive or even mandatory relief if
necessary, that there should clearly be only one source, and the clarity must
be from the standpoint of a person of average intelligence and recollection.
We shall shortly return to this conundrum.

13\. The distinction between an action for infringement and for passing off,
which has stood the test of time, is to be found in this passage from Kaviraj
Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories :

The other ground of objection that the findings are inconsistent really
proceeds on an error in appreciating the basic differences between Page 2136
the causes of action and right to relief in suits for passing off and for
infringement of a registered trade mark and in equating the essentials of a
passing off action with those in respect of an action complaining of an
infringement of a registered trade mark. We have already pointed out the suit
by the respondent complained both of an invasion of a statutory rights under
Section 21 in respect of a registered trade mark and also of a passing off by
the use of the same mark. The finding in favor of the appellant to which the
learned Counsel drew our attention was based upon dissimilarity of the packing
in which the goods of the two parties were vended, the difference in the
physical appearance of the two packets by reason of the variation in their
colour and other features and their general get-up together with the
circumstances that the name and address of the manufactory of the appellant
was prominently displayed on his packets and these features were all set out
for negativing the respondent's claim that the appellant had passed off his
goods as those of the respondent. These matters which are of the essence of
the cause of action for relief on the ground of passing off play but a limited
role in an action for infringement of a registered trade mark by the
registered proprietor who has a statutory right to that mark and who has a
statutory remedy in the event of the use by another of that mark or a
colourable imitation thereof. While an action for passing off is a Common Law
remedy being in substance an action for deceit, that is, a passing off by a
person of his own goods as those of another, that is not the gist of an action
for infringement. The action for infringement is a statutory remedy conferred
on the registered proprietor of a registered trade mark for the vindication of
"the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to those goods"
(Vide Section 21 of the Act). The use by the defendant of the trade mark of
the plaintiff is not essential in an action for passing off, but is the sine
qua non in the case of an action for infringement. No doubt, where the
evidence in respect of passing off consists merely of the colourable use of a
registered trade mark, the essential features of both the actions might
coincide in the sense that what would be a colourable imitation of a trade
mark in a passing off action would also be such in an action for infringement
of the same trade mark. But there the correspondence between the two ceases.
In an action for infringement, the plaintiff must, no doubt, make out that the
use of the defendant's mark is likely to deceive, but where the similarity
between the plaintiff's and the defendant's mark is so close either visually,
phonetically or otherwise and the court reaches the conclusion that there is
in imitation, no further evidence is required to establish that the
plaintiff's rights are violated. Expressed in another way, if the essential
features of the trade mark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the
defendant, the fact that the get-up, packing and other writing or marks on the
goods or on the packets in which he offers his goods for sale show marked
differences, or indicate clearly a trade origin different from that of the
registered proprietor of the mark would be immaterial; whereas in the case of
passing off, the defendant may escape liability Page 2137 if he can show that
the added matter is sufficient to distinguish his goods from those of the
plaintiff.

14\. We shall now briefly consider some other precedents on this interesting
question. Power Control Appliances v. Sumeet Machines Pvt. Ltd. concerned
infringement of the Plaintiff's copyright in and the use of the name 'Sumeet'
by the Defendant in his Trade/corporate name with effect from 1984, although
Sumeet was a registered trade mark of the Plaintiff since 1970. After
reproducing Section 30 of the Trade Marks Act 1958 their Lordships recounted
that "acquiescence is one of the defenses still available to the first
defendant. Of course it is a different issue whether the plea of acquiescence
is made of in this case.... Acquiescence is sitting by, when another is
invading the rights and spending money on it. It is a course of conduct
inconsistent with the claim for exclusive rights in a trade mark, trade name.
It implies positive acts; not merely silence or inaction such as is involved
in laches". This passage delineates the watershed between the legal concepts
of delay and of acquiescence. The Supreme Court found no evidence supporting
the Defendant's allegation that it was also manufacturing machines identical
to those manufactured by the Plaintiff and hence was in favor of the grant of
an ad interim injunction. Their Lordships also iterated the settled principle
of law relating to trade mark that there can be only one mark, one source and
one proprietor. Acquiescence was seen as a facet of delay which requires more
than simple inaction; there must be some positive role that the Plaintiff
plays, leading on the Defendant as it were to carry on business in a manner
which the Plaintiff subsequently takes umbrage against. Sumeet is one case
which appears to be a case of acquiescence because the Defendant, being the
son of the Plaintiffs, had been actively encouraged by the Plaintiff to start
his own enterprise. Things had fallen apart when the Defendant independently
and with hostility towards the Plaintiff commenced the manufacture of kitchen
mixers instead of merely marketing these machines produced by the Plaintiffs
or manufactured by it with the consent of the Plaintiff. Whilst the Plaintiff
commenced business in 1970, the Defendant was incorporated in 1984, with the
approval of the Plaintiffs, for manufacturing washing machines under the trade
name Sumeet. So far as the approval of the grant of electric machines for
kitchen use including mixies is concerned the reasoning is clear. However, if
the Defendant had been tacitly allowed to use the trade mark Sumeet then the
jural prohibition could only have been predicated on the pragmatic principle
of "one mark, one source and one proprietor" and not that there was no
acquiescence. This is clear from the fact that their Lordships had recorded
that one of the prayers was for infringement of copyright, in respect of which
'honest and concurrent user' is not a defense. Unlike a trade mark where such
a defense is available by virtue of Section 12 of the Trade Marks Act
(corresponding to Section 12(3) of the repealed Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958) the Defendant must perforce rely on an assignment of a copyright in
order to legitimately Page 2138 use it. The Plaintiff had not executed any
Deed of Assignment of the copyright if held in 'Sumeet' and hence their
Lordships approved the issuance of the injunction. In this analysis if the
copyright in Sumeet did not exist in favor of the Plaintiff, an injunction
would not have been granted. At the highest it could only have been issued
with regard to kitchen machines, since the Plaintiffs acquiescence on other
activities was irrefutable.

15\. As has been observed in Midas Hygiene Industries P. Ltd. v. Sudhir Bhatia
2004 (1) R.A.J. 586(SC) where infringement of a trade mark occurs normally an
injunction must issue even though there may be some delay in initiating
proceedings. If the adoption of the trade mark is dishonest or notorious a
prima facie case would exist in favor of the Plaintiff. We are unable to
discern from the Report of Midas the extent of the delay in that case. If
there is inordinate delay the distinguishing line between delay and
acquiescence becomes so blurred, in our opinion, that the grant or refusal of
an ad interim injunction would hang in the balance. Dishonesty or notoriety on
the part of the Defendant would then tilt the scales in favor of the
Plaintiff. The Trial Court must exercise its discretion in this regard, and
unless the result falls in that extremely rare category of perversity, the
Appellate Court must always be loath in substituting that decision with its
own.

16\. In Mahendra and Mahendra Paper Mills Ltd. v. Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd.
the Supreme Court noted that the Plaintiff/Respondent had numerous associate
and subsidiary companies and was transacting business in that name and style
since 13-1-1948; and 'Mahindra' was its registered trade name. The Defendant
commenced business in 1974 as a sole proprietorship concern, Mahendra Radio
House and thereafter a number of other concerns were flouted. The ad interim
injunction granted in favor of the Plaintiff by the Single Judge was affirmed
by both appellate Courts. In Montari Overseas Ltd. v. Montari Industries Ltd.
1996 PTC (16) 142 the Plaintiff was incorporated in 1983, and had several
subsidiary companies also. The Defendant was incorporated in 1993 and it
claimed to be operating in textiles, allegedly an altogether different field
from the operation of the Plaintiff. Nevertheless the Defendant was injuncted
from using the corporate name. Upholding the grant of the interim injunction a
Division Bench of this Court opined that "no company is entitled to carry on
business in a manner so as to generate a belief that it is connected with the
business of another company, firm or individual. The same principle of law
which applies to an action for passing off of a trade mark will apply more
strongly to the passing off of a trade or corporate name of one for the
other".

17\. The following passage from Kerly's Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names is
indeed of relevance:

MANDAtorY INJUNCTIONS; ORDERS TO CHANGE NAME 18-86 The court has power to make
mandatory as well as prohibitory injunctions. Procedurally, mandatory
injunctions may be more difficult, Page 2139 because they require to be
policed, but this is simply a factor to be considered (and in relation to
interim injunctions it is a matter going to the balance of convenience, since
it may be more prone to cause injustice than an order preserving the status
quo, Nottingham Building Society v. Eurodynamics [1993] F.S.R. 468).

18-87 Mandatory relief in a passing-off action may include an order to compel
the defendants to state that they are not connected with the claimant, where
they are selling the claimant's goods but also falsely giving the impression
that they are authorised agents [Sony v. Saray [1983] F.S.R. 302. 18-88 A
defendant whose company name is inherently deceptive may be ordered to change
its name. Such an order may even be made at an interim stage : Glaxo v.
Glaxowellcome [1996] F.S.R. 388. Likewise, a company registering a website
with a name which is so inherently deceptive as to amount to an instrument of
fraud may be ordered to change the name of the site or to transfer it to the
claimant. Marks and Spencer v. One-in-a-million [1998] F.S.R. 265 : [1999]
F.S.R. 1 (the order there being made following a successful application for
summary judgment).

18\. An interim Order had been passed by Division Bench of this Court while
hearing an Appeal. Ordinarily, it may have only persuasive value so far as
other Division Benches are concerned. However, this decision has now been
affirmed by the Apex Court in Ramdev:

In P.M. Diesels Ltd. v. Patel Field Marshal Agencies and Ors. 2001 PTC 20
(Del), the High Court noticed the distinction between logo, trade mark and
trade name and was of the view that the defendants cannot be permitted to use
the trade name so as to defeat the other portion of the order of injunction
already passed against him. An injunction can also be granted against the
respondents to use the corporate name.

IMPACT OF AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE COMPANIES ACT AND THE TRADE MARKS ACT

19\. We now turn our attention to Section 22(1)(ii) of the Companies Act, 1956
and Section 29(5) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 which reads thus- 22.
Rectification of name of company.-(1) If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a
company on its first registration or on its registration by a new name, is
registered by a name which,-

(i) ...

(ii) on an application by a registered proprietor of a trade mark, is in the
opinion of the Central Government identical with, or too nearly resembles, a
registered trade mark of such proprietor under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, such
company,-

(a) may, by ordinary resolution and with the previous approval of the Central
Government signified in writing, change its name or new name; and

(b) shall, if the Central Government so directs within twelve months of its
first registration or registration by its new name, Page 2140 as the case may
be, or within twelve months of the commencement of this Act, whichever is
later, by ordinary resolution and with the previous approval of the Central
Government signified in writing change its name or new name within a period of
three months from the date of the direction or such longer period as the
Central Government may think fit to allow:

Provided that no application under Clause (ii) made by a registered proprietor
of a trade mark after five years of coming to notice of registration of the
company shall be considered by the Central Government.

29\. Infringement of registered trade marks -

...

(5) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person if he uses such
registered trade mark, as his trade name or part of his trade name, or name of
his business concern or part of the name, of his business concern dealing in
goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered.

(6) For the purposes of this section, a person uses a registered mark, if, in
particular, he--

(a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;

...

The phrase "a name which is identical with or too nearly resembles the name by
which a company in existence has been previously registered", is also to be
found in Section 20(2) of the Companies Act which along with Section 22(1)(i)

(ii) and its proviso was introduced thereto with effect from 15-9-2003. The
date from which these amendments came into operation appears to have escaped
the notice of the parties since the subject suit had been filed over a year
earlier, in April 2002. Obviously Parliament had Section 29(5) of the Trade
Marks Act, 1999 in sight.

20\. Our attention has been drawn to Ellora Industries Delhi v. Banarsi Das
1981-PTC-46 in which this Court had injuncted the Defendant even from using
the word 'Ellora' as part of its business name as it would be misleading in
the context of the Plaintiff's 'Elora' trade mark registered six years prior
to the Defendant's use of the mark Ellora. Both parties were selling clocks.
The Division Bench opined that the misrepresentation pertained to the origin
of the goods, and passing off could occur even where the goods were not
similar. More recently, in Montari the Division Bench had ruled that the
Plaintiff has two independent rights of relief against the Defendant who may
be using the corporate name of the previously incorporated Plaintiff, firstly
under Section 22 of the Companies Act and secondly of causing confusion
(passing off) under the common law. These two provisions have been relied upon
by Mr. Sundaram to contend that since the Plaintiff has ventilated its
grievance against the Defendant's use of 'Atlas' as a part of its trade or
corporate name only in 2002 whereas they had specific Page 2141 knowledge of
this user since August, 1995, its demur had become statutorily barred. In
Montari the Division Bench had rejected the argument to the effect that the
Plaintiff had to seek redressal only under the Companies Act. However, the
suit had been filed and the injunction had been granted in 1995 much before
the amendments to Sections 20 and 22 of the Companies Act came into force. As
these provisions stood in 1995, no prescription had been provided under the
Companies Act for initiating an action under Section 20 of that statute. It is
trite that there is no legal bar against a party traversing or selecting one
of several avenues leading to its ultimate destination. We are in respectful
agreement with Montari with the caveat, however, that the Bench did not have
to consider the question of limitation either under the Companies Act or the
Trade Marks Act, 1999. Furthermore, the Bench was not called upon to construe
provisions analogous inter alia to Section 29(5) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999,
which does not contain any period of limitation after which the right to
object gets extinguished, so far as litigative action is concerned. It is of
significance that the present Sections 20 and 22 were introduced by Section
158 read with the Schedule thereto of the Trade Marks Act, 1999. The
legislative intent is clear, namely, that whilst recourse to the Companies Act
must be taken within five years, the right to restrain infringement or passing
off is ever enduring, since no limitation period has been prescribed either
under Section 29 or 30 of the Trade Marks Act. Of course, delay in filing a
suit would always remain an important factor so far as interim relief in an
infringement or passing off action is concerned. In any event, since the
present Suit has been filed seventeen months before September 2003, when the
amendments came into force, there is absolutely no merit in the arguments of
the Defendants. For this reason we are also not required to delve deeper into
the interesting but complex question of the effect of the unhappily worded
proviso to Section 22(1) of the Companies Act. In our opinion the provisions
should read thus - "Provided that no application under Clause (ii) made by a
proprietor of a trade mark shall be considered by the Central Government after
the expiry of five years from the date on which the applicant noticed the
registration of the Company having an offending name". Assuming that a
plaintiff noticed the registration of an offensively named Company in August
1998 would his challenge thereto stands extinguished being statutorily barred
immediately on 15-9-2002, even though prior thereto neither remedy nor its
limitation had been provided for. We would have expected the statute to
clarify that where the cause of action had already arisen five years prior to
the introduction of the provision, requisite action should be initiated within
one or more months. As already observed by us, we do not have to rule on this
conundrum. The amendment to Section 22 incorporates widespread changes in
form, but in substance introduces the proprietors' right to compel a company
to change its name in certain circumstances.

ADHERENCE TO THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES ACT, 1976 AND THE
PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION ACT, 1954

21\. Mr. Sudhir Chandra contends that the Defendant can quite easily change
its corporate/trade name and thereby comply with the mandates of Page 2142 the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 as well as the Standards of Weights and Measures Act,
1976 as also the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954. The argument has
merit. In our opinion, whenever a defendant is restrained from using a trade
mark or trade name it would have to avail of the provisions of Section 21 of
the Companies Act, 1956 and by a special resolution and after obtaining the
approval of the Central Government, change its name. This is also the
pragmatic solution since the Court had the duty to safeguard consumer
interests. As already observed above, the concerns of the customer are
preeminent, and it is cardinal that he should not be confused into purchasing
goods of an imitator under the mistaken belief that it is from the authentic
or original source. A businessman would adopt a confusing name or a masquerade
only if he can gain from it by hitching on the bandwagon of a reputed and
established brand. If his goods are superior he would take pains to
distinguish his products from all the others. Had Mr. Chandra's argument been
pressed in Ramdev we are certain that it would have found favor with their
Lordships. In fact, this is exactly what their Lordships had ensured by
mandating clarification of being disclaimer in the second finding after the
Review.

DECISION

22\. Unlike Ramdev the present adversaries have not arrived at any
understanding on the use of the trade mark and trade name. The learned Single
Judge has injuncted the Defendants from using the trade mark and to this
extent no challenge exists. In Ramdev, the MoU was to the effect that whereas
one brother namely the defendant Shri Arvindbhai became the exclusive owner of
Ramdev Exports and the firm Ramdev Masala the other two brothers became the
owners of the Plaintiff Company. The Apex Court specifically records, in that
factual matrix, that the use of the brand name was available to all three
whereas the trade mark 'Ramdev' belonged exclusively to the Company. In the
dispute in hand, the amicable distribution, severance or partition of assets
of the Atlas Group had been conceived of by the creation of three baskets of
assets, unfortunately, this has not been implemented. All the family members
accuse Shri Arun Kapur of putting a spoke in the wheel (no pun intended).
Indubitably his two brothers, who together with him constitute one of the
three family groups, do not support him. Therefore, it is palpably evident
that the Respondent has not been allowed, contractually or otherwise, to use
the trade mark or the trade name (corporate name) for the same business or
indeed for any other business. Mr. Chandra has explained that if an impasse
had not been created by Shri Arun Kapur in respect of the choosing of one of
the three baskets, the problem would have been resolved. This aspect of the
dispute does not directly concern us in this Appeal.

23\. Contrary to Ramdev, the Defendant/Respondent has no contractual right to
sell cycles using the name 'Atlas' directly or indirectly. Of course, the
Trial Judge has the discretion to take the decision on this question, and
Wander would commend, if not command us, not to interfere with the exercise of
this discretion. The conclusion that must be drawn from the Page 2143 detailed
discussion and analysis above is that while exercising discretion the Court's
endeavor must be to remove any possibility of deception or confusion so far as
the customer is concerned. In other words the jural approach must be to ensure
that there is only one mark, one source and one proprietor. Where the same
product is being offered for purchase (masala or cycle as the case may be)
continuance of confusion should be put to an end.

24\. The conundrum so far as the use of the trade/corporate/brand name is
concerned is sought to be unravelled by the learned Single Judge onwards from
paragraph 23 of the impugned Order. Even in respect of the trade name the
Court has gone into the ramifications of delay and acquiescence. However, the
interests of the consumer, epitomized by the phrase that there can be only one
mark, one source or one proprietor have not been accorded paramountcy, and
hence discretion has been incorrectly exercised. The learned Single Judge
fails to do so not because of the existence of any understanding or contract
between the parties, but because of acquiescence, i.e. user by the
Defendant/Respondent of 'Atlas' in its corporate name for seven years. Here
again the case of the Plaintiff has not been properly kept in perspective,
viz. that the Defendants started the business of manufacture and sale of
cycles only in February 2002 and the Plaintiffs immediately filed the Suit
within a couple of months. Acquiescence, as we have already discussed, must
contain some positive action on the part of the complaining party. Once
February 2002 is taken as the focal date, and once the customers' rights are
kept in mind, we are of the opinion that no discretion remains and the
injunction must issue in favor of the Plaintiffs. This is especially so since
the learned Single Judge has found in favor of the Plaintiff on the question
of confusion or deception, and has accordingly injuncted the Defendant from
using the trade mark 'Atlas'. It seems to us that the Midas doctrine applies
both to trade marks as well as trade names even though so far as the latter
goes there may not be any 'infringement' in the statutory sense.

25\. With all due respect to the learned Single Judge we are unable to agree
with the interpretation imparted to Section 22 of the Companies Act. The
Plaintiff has taken recourse to its common law right to restrain infringement
and/or passing off. These rights have not been foreclosed by the amendments
that came into force on 15.9.2003 even though the Trade Marks Act was in
focus. It is plain that the mischief of passing off can be orchestrated even
through a misleading adoption or exhibition of a trade name. Prima facie, even
though the cycles marketed by the Defendant ostensibly are under the trade
mark Premium Gold, by mentioning Atlas on the packaging/cycle/publicity
material any averagely intelligent consumer would believe he is buying an
'Atlas' cycle. After encountering a salesman interested in selling the
Defendant's products, any doubt that the prospective customer may harbour as
to whether he is not buying the Plaintiff's product would be drowned by
misleading statements. This is the commercial reality of the market which it
would be naive to ignore while exercising discretion.

Page 2144

26\. It is manifest from a perusal of the impugned Order that the conclusion
reached by the learned Single Judge was influenced in large measure by the
proviso to Section 22(1) of the Companies Act. In paragraph 25 it has been
observed that the delay in initiating action for restraining the first
Defendant from using the corporate name was fatal. Obviously this conclusion
permeates and influences the impugned decision in its entirety. The learned
Single Judge has also articulated the view that the limitation had been
introduced in 1999, and hence the Plaintiff could no longer force a change in
the Defendant's corporate name. With respect, this is an anachronism. The
amendments took effect only on 15-9-2003 and ought not to have been applied at
the time when the impugned Order was passed. As soon as the injunction is
granted the consequence would be that the Defendants would have to change
their corporate/trade/brand name in order to comply with the mandates of the
Weights and Measures Act as well as the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
In the context of the fasciculous comprising Sections 20 to 25 of the
Companies Act, the name of Defendant No. 1 would be deemed to be
"undesirable". Even if the Plaintiff could not force a change in name under
Section 22, there can be no difficulty in the Defendant's invoking Section 21
of the Companies Act to achieve this result.

27\. The Appeal has merit and is allowed. The impugned Orders are modified to
the extent that the Defendants are restrained from using the word 'Atlas' in
their corporate/trade name in respect of bicycles and bicycle parts. All
pending applications are disposed of.

FAO(OS) 280/2003

28\. We shall now consider FAO(OS) 280/2003. In our view there can be no two
opinions on the fact that the Order impugned in FAO(OS) 395/2002 injuncted the
Defendants from using the trade mark 'Atlas' but did not restrain the
Defendants from using 'Atlas' in their corporate name. Once this conclusion is
arrived at the challenge to the impugned Order dated 30.5.2003 loses all its
strength. In fact, keeping in view the arguments addressed before us in
FAO(OS) 395/2002 we would have accepted learned Counsel for the Appellants not
to press the present Appeal. We are in agreement with the learned Single Judge
that the public notices issued by the Defendants, to which the appellants have
taken objection, do not give the impression to the public that this Court has
permitted the Defendants to use the word 'Atlas' as their trade mark.

29\. Appeal as well as pending applications is dismissed.

