

Delhi High Court

Goyal Mg Gases Private Ltd. vs Messer Griesheim Gmbh on 1 July, 2014

Author: Pradeep Nandrajog

    
    
    *      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    %                       Judgment Reserved on : May 05, 2014
                          Judgment Pronounced on : July 01, 2014
    +                         EFA (OS) 3/2014
    
           GOYAL MG GASES PRIVATE LTD.                .....Appellant
                   Represented by: Mr.Harish Malhotra, Sr.Advocate
                                   instructed by Mr.Tarun and
                                   Mr.Siran Mehta, Advocates
                                          versus
           MESSER GRIESHEIM GMBH                      .....Respondent
                   Represented by: Mr.Amit Sibal, Sr.Advocate
                                   instructed by Ms.Mohna M.Lal,
                                   Ms.Geetali Talukdar and Mr.Tahir
                                   Ashraf Siddiqui, Advocates
           CORAM:
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
           HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE JAYANT NATH
    PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
    

1\. Vide impugned order dated November 29, 2013 the learned Single Judge has
dismissed EA No.32/2007, EA No.152/2008 and EA No.470/2009 filed by the
appellant. The learned Single Judge has held :

(a) That since the decree sought to be executed is in sum of more than
`20,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty Lacs only) the High Court of Delhi has
jurisdiction to execute the decree.

(b) On merits challenge to the foreign decree on the plea that it violates the
law in India was not sustainable i.e. that the decree was not in breach of
Indian laws.

(c) That the objection of the foreign decree being obtained by fraud was not
sustainable.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 1 of 29

(d) That the objection that the foreign decree was not executable being not on
merits was not sustainable.

(e) That the objection that the Courts in England has no jurisdiction to pass
the decree was not sustainable.

2\. As recorded in the order dated May 01, 2014 passed in the appeal the
parties had consented that we should first decide the issue whether the Delhi
High Court could entertain the execution petition filed by the respondent to
execute a foreign decree. The reason was that if the Delhi High Court did not
have the jurisdiction to entertain the execution petition filed, it would lack
the jurisdiction to decide on the validity of the decree, keeping in view the
objections filed and in said eventuality the only course available would be to
set aside the impugned order as being without jurisdiction with the
observation that the decision by the learned Single Judge on merits would be
treated as a view without jurisdiction, leaving it open for the executing
court to decide the objections uninfluenced by any observations made by the
learned Single Judge.

3\. Thus, the singular issue arising for our consideration in the present
appeal is : „Whether the decree passed by a superior court of a reciprocating
territory can be executed by the High Court of Delhi in exercise of its
original jurisdiction in terms of Section 44A(1 )of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.‟

4\. Our journey must commence therefore by noting the statute which requires a
consideration. Section 44A(1). It reads as under:-

> "44A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in reciprocating territory.-

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 2 of 29

> (1) Where a certified copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of any
> reciprocating territory has been filed in a District Court, the decree may
> be executed in India as if it had been passed by the District Court."
> (Emphasis Supplied)

5\. A bare perusal of the above highlighted provision evinces that Section 44A
envisages presentation of a petition seeking execution of a decree of a
superior Court of any reciprocating territory before a 'District Court'.

6\. The vexing question which therefore begs an answer is - 'Whether the High
Court of Delhi can be treated as a „District Court‟ for the purpose of Section
44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.'

7\. Before venturing to answer the said question, which goes to the root of
the matter, it would be incumbent to notice the antecedent history and
attending circumstances leading to the insertion of the said provision in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

8\. The judgment of a foreign Court, being the command of a judicial agency of
a foreign sovereign, cannot be enforced beyond the limits of its own
territory. A sovereign cannot command obedience outside his own realm. Under
the common law, a foreign judgment or a decree does not operate proprio vigore
and is therefore not capable of automatic execution. Ordinarily, therefore,
there can be no direct execution of a foreign judgment or decree.

9\. It is for this reason that a party is entitled either to sue upon the
foreign judgment/ decree or to bring a suit upon the original cause of action
as held in the decisions reported as 1809-11 East 118 Hali v. Odber, and
1887-37 OD 244 In Re, Henderson; Nouvion v. Freeman.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 3 of 29

10\. But over the years legal luminaries and Courts have attempted to provide
a juristic basis for the recognition of foreign judgments. Attempts have been
made to reconcile the two seemingly rival considerations, namely, the
necessity of giving effect to foreign adjudications and the assertion of the
uncompromised sovereignty of national Courts. Several doctrines enunciated in
this regard have their faithful adherents, but it has been felt that a
rational basis in each case is not always easily discernible.

11\. Amongst the earliest doctrines propounded in England was the one based on
the principle of 'comity of Nations'. This principle, according to Cheshire,
means that 'in order to obtain reciprocal treatment from the Courts of other
countries, we are compelled to take foreign judgments as they stand and to
give them full faith and credit.' It is not necessary to trace the reasons
here, but this doctrine came to be recognized as inadequate and soon fell to
the challenge of its critics.

12\. According to Professor Gutteridge, the doctrine of an 'acquired right'
explains the reasons for the enforcement of a foreign judgment, and this is
the doctrine to which Dean H.E.Read probably refers when he explains:

> "The true basis upon which the Anglo-Dominion authorities place the
> recognition of a foreign judgment is that it proves the fact that a vested
> right has been created through the judicial process by the law of a foreign
> law district."

13\. Several decisions by the Courts in England have now accepted the view
that the recognition of a foreign judgment is based on the assumption that it
creates a new legal obligation. It proceeds from the concept that a foreign
judgment, creates by fiction, a contract between the EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 4
of 29 parties. 1870-8 QB 155 Schibsby v. Westenholz (at p. 159; per Blackburn,
J)

14\. Finally, the school led by Von Bar attempts to harmonize the recognition
of foreign judgments with the application of foreign laws, by drawing
attention to the relationship between law and judgment. A judgment, in his
view, is a lex specialis, a law regulating one single case.

15\. These are among the more prominent doctrines upon which the recognition
and enforcement of foreign judgments has been sought to be justified.

16\. Although legal jurisprudence appears to have abandoned the 'doctrine of
comity' based upon the rule of reciprocity, the requirement of reciprocal
treatment has been made by statute in several countries, a practical pre-
requisite to the enforcement of foreign judgments. From the Judgments
Extension Act, 1868 in England to the Administration of Justice Act, 1920 the
principle of reciprocal treatment was consistently followed and later on
attained full expression in the Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement)
Act, 1933 when the scheme was extended to the countries completely foreign in
the political sense to the United Kingdom.

17\. The Judgments Extension Act, 1868 was the first in point of time to be
enacted by the British Parliament, which made certain judgments of the
Superior Courts of Scotland and Ireland effective in the United Kingdom.
Before that Act, the only way to enforce such judgments in the United Kingdom
was by institution of a suit on them. After the Act, the executability of such
judgments in the United Kingdom was permitted, on a system of registration
with the British Courts by EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 5 of 29 means of a
certificate that the particular judgment had been obtained in a Superior Court
in Scotland or Ireland. The foreign judgment, when so registered, was regarded
as extended judgment for purposes of execution but was made subject to certain
restrictions.

18\. Next came the Administration of Justice Act, 1920 which extended the
facility of execution in the United Kingdom of foreign judgments obtained in a
Superior Court in any of the British dominions. The judgment-creditor within
twelve years of the judgment could apply to the High Court in England or
Ireland for registration and the British Court in its discretion could allow
or refuse the application. The registration was, therefore, not as of right
unlike under the earlier Act of 1868. Further the 1920 Act provided for
certain conditions or restrictions for registration some of which were
analogous to those mentioned in Section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in India. Once a foreign judgment of a Dominion was registered at a
British Court, it was regarded to have the same force as if it had been
initially obtained in the registering Court. The Act of 1920 allowed
registration only if its provisions had been extended by an Order-in-Council
to the Dominion in which a Superior Court passed the judgment. Registration
was thus based on reciprocity.

19\. In 1933 the Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement) Act came into
force, the effect of which was to extend the provision for registration to
foreign judgments of Superior Courts in foreign countries even outside the
Dominions. But the extension was to be by Orders-in- Council and on a
reciprocal basis. Provisions are found in the Act, which enable a person, who
holds a final and conclusive foreign judgment in his favour of a Superior
Court in a reciprocating territory, to apply to the EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 6
of 29 British Court in England for registration within six years of such
judgment. The British Court was no longer left with the discretion to decline
the registration. The provision for registration was confined to foreign
judgments for recovery of money. On certain grounds, specified in the Act,
liberty was given to the person against whom the judgment was given to have
the registration set aside. The effect of registration under the Act would
appear to be that the foreign judgment registered would, for the purpose of
execution, be of the same force and be subject to the same control as if it
had been originally given in the registering Court and that no further
substantive action in England would be necessary on a foreign judgment, which
was entitled to registration; meaning thereby there was no need to file a
fresh suit.

20\. In British India there was originally no statutory or other provision,
conferring jurisdiction on Indian Courts, to enforce foreign judgments in
execution. On February 27, 1924, a Bill was introduced in the Central
Legislature to provide for enforcement, in British India, of judgments
obtained in the United Kingdom or other notified parts of His Majesty's
Dominions, as part of a reciprocal arrangement by which the provisions of Part
II of the Administration of Justice Act, 1920 were to be extended to the
British India. But the Bill was dropped in 1925 on the ground that full
reciprocity could not be ensured since most of the British Indian Courts of
unlimited civil jurisdiction would not possibly be viewed as Superior Courts
as contemplated by the Administration of Justice Act, 1920\. But the position
became different with the passing of the Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal
Enforcement) Act, 1933 which provided for the extension of Part I of the Act
to His Majesty's Dominions outside the United Kingdom by the Order-in-Council
and also left it to the Order-in-

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 7 of 29

Council to specify the Courts which should be deemed as 'superior' within the
meaning of the Act. The Lord Chancellor, having expressed his no objection to
the British Act being applied to all Indian Courts possessing unlimited
original civil jurisdiction, Section 44A was inserted in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 by Section 2 of the Code of the Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 1937.

21\. The section as it stood then, read as under:-

> "44A. Where a certified copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of
> the United Kingdom or any reciprocating territory has been filed in a
> District Court, the decree may be executed in British India as if it had
> been passed by the District Court.

> Explanation 1--'Superior Courts', with reference to the United Kingdom,
> means the High Court in England, the Court of Sessions in Scotland, the High
> Court in Northern Ireland, the Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of
> Durham.

> Explanation 2.--'Reciprocating territory' means any country or territory,
> situated in any part of His Majesty's Dominions or in India which the
> Governor-General-in- Council may, from time to time, by notification in the
> Gazette of India, declare to be reciprocating territory for the purposes of
> this section; and ' superior Courts ', with reference to any such territory,
> means such Courts as may be specified in the said notification."

22\. To the section was added a further 'Explanation' setting out the meaning
and scope of a decree with reference to a superior Court.

23\. In view of the constitutional changes in 1937, certain consequential
amendments were made to the section by the Government of India (Adaptation of
Indian Laws) Order, 1937.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 8 of 29

24\. Later upon attaining of Independence and the adoption of the Constitution
of India, India being proclaimed a sovereign democratic republic on and from
January 26, 1950, it became necessary to amend Section 44A, and by the Civil
Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 1952 the provision was recast and the
definition of 'reciprocating territory' in Section 44A was enlarged to cover
any country or territory outside India which the Central Government, may by
notification in the official gazette, declare to be a reciprocating country,
so that now the Code puts all countries or territories outside India on an
equal footing.

25\. In light of this legislative backdrop, we now proceed to answer the issue
of maintainability of the present lis before the High Court of Delhi.

26\. It would be relevant to note that the term 'District Court' employed in
Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is not distinctively defined
under the definition clause viz. Section 2. However, pertinently it finds
reference in definition of the term 'District' comprised in Section 2(4) of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which reads:-

> "„district‟ means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal Civil
> Court of original jurisdiction (hereinafter called a "District Court"), and
> includes the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of a
> High Court."(Emphasis Supplied)

27\. Two things are discernible from a perusal of Section 2(4) of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 as extracted hereinabove. Firstly, Section 2(4) defines
'District' in relation to a geographical area or territory. Secondly, the
expression 'District Court' connotes the 'principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction'.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 9 of 29

28\. It may also be noticed that the legislature, in its wisdom, has included
the reference to the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction
of a High Court after defining the 'District Court' in Section 2(4) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

29\. The significance and effect of the said manner of legislative drafting
shall be discussed a little further in our judgment, in conjunction with other
relevant circumstances.

30\. Therefore, it emerges beyond pale of doubt that the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 prescribes 'District Court' as a connotation of a 'principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction'.

31\. When so replaced, Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 would
read as follows:

> „Where a certified copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of any
> reciprocating territory has been filed in a principal Civil Court of
> original jurisdiction, the decree may be executed in India as if it had been
> passed by the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.‟

32\. Meaning thereby, it would be the principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction which would be competent to execute the decree passed by a
Foreign Court in terms of the provisions of Section 44A of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.

33\. What is meant by the expression 'principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction'?

34\. The expression 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction' has not
been defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 10 of 29

35\. Such being the position, we travel beyond the realm of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 and look at other Statutes to ascertain the meaning of the
expression 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction'.

36\. We first have a glance at the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, which is
applicable to Delhi. Section 24 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 reads as under-

> "24. District Court to be principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction-

> The Court of the District Judge shall be deemed to be the District Court or
> principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in the district". (Emphasis
> Supplied)

37\. At the outset we may note that two things are discernible from a reading
of Section 24 of the Punjab Courts Act. Firstly, the term 'Court of District
Judge', has by fiction of law, deemed to be the 'District Court' and secondly,
the term 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction' has been employed as
an alternative expression for the term 'District Court'.

38\. It therefore emerges that the expression 'principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction‟/District Court' can be substituted by the expression
'Court of the District Judge'.

39\. We now endow our consideration upon the General Clauses Act, 1897.
Section 3(17) of the said Act reads as under:-

> "'District Judge' shall mean the judge of a principal Civil Court of
> original jurisdiction, but shall not include a High Court in the exercise of
> its ordinary or extraordinary original civil jurisdiction." (Emphasis
> Supplied)

40\. In consonance with the mandate of Section 24 of the Punjab Courts Act,
1918. Section 3(17) of the General Clauses Act, 1887 also envisages that the
expression 'principal Civil Court of original EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 11 of 29
jurisdiction' can be alternatively substituted by the expression 'Court of the
District Judge'.

41\. Furthermore, significantly Section 3(17) of the General Clauses Act, 1897
prescribes that the expression 'District Judge' shall not include a High Court
in exercise of its ordinary or extraordinary original civil jurisdiction.

42\. The cumulative effect of the conjoint reading of Section 24 of the Punjab
Courts Act, 1918 and Section 3(17) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 is that
the expression 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction‟/‟District
Court' can be substituted by the expression 'Court of the District Judge'.
Further, it follows that the expressions 'principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction‟/„District Court‟/ „Court of District Judge' shall not include a
High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extraordinary original civil
jurisdiction.

43\. As noticed by us earlier, in the context of Section 2(4) of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, the legislature in its wisdom has included the
reference to the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of a
High Court only after defining the 'District Court' as the 'principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction'. Therefore, it is evident that the legislative
intent was not to treat a High Court as falling within the ambit of its
preceding expression 'District Court'.

44\. In this regard we may draw support from the observations of the Calcutta
High Court in its decision reported as AIR 1927 Cal 290 Hyat Mahomed and Ors
v. Shaikh Mannu and Ors., wherein it was held by Rankin, C.J that it is quite
true that the word 'District' in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, includes
not merely the local limits of what is EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 12 of 29
ordinarily called a District Court, but includes the local limits of a High
Court in its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, however, that is a very
different thing indeed from saying that the words 'District Court' wherever
they appear in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 mean and include a High Court
in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.

45\. Reading of Section 24 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 applicable to Delhi
and Section 3(17) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 also reinforces and lends
credence to this conclusion.

46\. At this juncture it would be apposite to take note of Section 5 of Delhi
High Court Act, 1966 which deals with the jurisdiction of the High Court of
Delhi. The said provision had been heavily pressed into service by the learned
Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent/decree holder in support
of the submission that the High Court of Delhi would qualify as the 'District
Court' in terms of Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 since the
Delhi High Court has been conferred 'original civil jurisdiction' for suits,
the value of which exceeds rupees twenty lakhs. It was submitted that the
jurisdiction vested with the High Court in terms of this provision is to the
complete exclusion (ouster) of the jurisdiction of all other Courts
established in the territory of Delhi, and for the execution of a decree
exceeding the sum of rupees twenty lakhs, as in the present case, only the
High Court of Delhi would be a 'court of competent jurisdiction' in accordance
with the mandate of law. Thus we note Section 5 of the Delhi High Court Act,
1966. It reads as under:-

> "5 Jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi-

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 13 of 29

> (1) The High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of the territories for
> the time being included in the Union territory of Delhi, all such original,
> appellate and other jurisdiction as, under the law in force immediately
> before the appointed day, is exercisable in respect of the territories by
> the High Court of Punjab. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law
> for the time being in force, the High Court of Delhi shall also have in
> respect of the said territories ordinary original civil jurisdiction in
> every suit the value of which exceeds rupees twenty lakhs." (Emphasis
> Supplied)

47\. A careful analysis of the contours and content of the preceding provision
unequivocally evinces that the non-obstante clause contained in sub-section
(2) confers 'ordinary original civil jurisdiction' upon the High Court of
Delhi, to the exclusion of all Courts constituted in the territory of Delhi,
with respect to every suit, the value of which exceeds rupees twenty lakhs.

48\. Furthermore, the legislature has employed the expression 'ordinary
original civil jurisdiction' in relation to the jurisdiction vested by it in
the High Court of Delhi and has in its wisdom not termed the High Court of
Delhi as the 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction' (a connotation
which we find is used interchangeably with 'District Court' or the 'Court of
the District Judge'), for suits valued more than rupees twenty lakhs.

49\. We may at the outset express our agreement to the contention of the
respondent/decree holder that the High Court of Delhi enjoys original civil
jurisdiction, to the complete exclusion of all the Courts established in the
territory of Delhi, for entertaining suits the value of which exceeds rupees
twenty lakhs. The said proposition is unexceptionable and cannot be assailed.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 14 of 29

50\. It is also true that the mechanism contemplated under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 for execution of decrees passed by the Courts governed by
provisions of the Code, (hereinafter referred as 'domestic decrees') requires
that the decree be executed by a court which either passed the said decree
(Section 38) or upon transfer by a 'transferee court', which must be a 'court
of competent jurisdiction' in terms of territorial as well as pecuniary
jurisdiction (Section 39). The test of competence of a 'transferee court' to
execute a decree, as provided under Section 39 of the Code, is whether the
said court would have jurisdiction to try the suit in which such decree was
passed.

51\. However, we find a complete hiatus in the propositions sought to be
projected by the respondent/decree holder to establish maintainability of the
present action, inasmuch as there is no tenable jurisprudential foundation to
construe the High Court of Delhi as the 'District Court' in terms of Section
44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and neither any legal justification
to telescope the requirements contemplated under Section 39 of the Code into
Section 44A thereof.

52\. We have already held, for the reasons extensively discussed in the
preceding paragraphs, that under the prevailing scheme of law the High Court
of Delhi cannot be construed as the 'District Court' as envisaged under
Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and rather the 'Court of the
District Judge' would be the 'District Court' for the said purpose.

53\. It may be true that concerning suits the ordinary original civil
jurisdiction is exercised based on pecuniary limits, but based thereon it
would be impossible to read into Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, for the purpose of execution of a foreign decree, the EFA (OS) No.3/2014
Page 15 of 29 said concept of ordinary original civil jurisdiction based on
pecuniary limits.

54\. In all fairness to the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent/decree holder, it would be the bounden duty of this Court to
consider the judgments cited by him in support of the submission.

55\. The first judgment relied in this regard is a decision rendered by a Full
Bench of this Court reported as ILR 1973 (2) Delhi 933 (FB) Arjan Singh v
Union of India.

56\. The facts of the said case were that on April 14, 1960, the Sub- Judge,
1st Class, Delhi passed an ex-parte decree, in favour of the respondent and
against the appellant for recovery of `47,521/-. The Delhi High Court Act,
1966 came into effect from October 31, 1966. On April 17, 1967 the respondent
moved an application in the Delhi High Court on its Original Side to execute
the decree passed by the Court of the Sub- Judge. Following two questions were
referred to the Full Bench for its consideration:-

> "(a) In which Court all future applications whether seeking execution or any
> other relief should be moved where a decree for more than rupees twenty five
> thousand has been passed by a Subordinate Judge prior to 31-10- 1966; and

> (b) Whether Section 16 read with Section 5 of the Delhi High Court Act
> contemplates execution proceedings pending on 31-10-1966 as falling within
> the ambit of proceedings which stand transferred to the High Court by virtue
> of Section 16 of the Delhi High Courts Act, if the same were pending before
> a Subordinate Judge on 31-10- 1966."

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 16 of 29

57\. After noting the decisions of the Supreme Court and the Full Bench of the
Punjab High Court reported as AIR 1956 SC 87 Merala Ramanna v Nallaparaju &
Ors. and AIR 1962 Punjab 394 (10) Mehar Singh & Anr. v Kasturi Ram & Ors. and
the provisions of Section 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, defining
the expression 'court which passed a decree', the Full Bench held that both,
the subordinate Court which passed a decree prior to the enactment of the
Delhi High Court Act, 1966, and the High Court of Delhi, would have concurrent
jurisdiction to execute the decree passed in a suit value whereof was more
than rupees twenty five thousand.

58\. A microscopic analysis of the said decision would evince that the Full
Bench had proceeded on the premise that after the enactment of Delhi High
Court Act, the High Court would be competent to execute a decree passed in a
suit of valuation of more than rupees twenty five thousand. In this backdrop,
the Full Bench delved upon the fact that whether a subordinate Court which had
passed the decree of valuation of more than twenty five thousand rupees prior
to the enactment of Delhi High Court Act would have jurisdiction (along with
the High Court) to execute the said decree even after the enactment of Delhi
High Court Act. In the said case, the Full Bench had no occasion whatsoever to
examine the provisions of Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
dealing with execution of decree passed by a foreign Court and thus the ratio
laid down in said case cannot be applied in the present case, more
particularly when Full Bench had proceeded on the premise that after the
enactment of Delhi High Court Act, the High Court would be competent to
execute a decree of valuation of more than rupees twenty five thousand.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 17 of 29

59\. The second judgment relied upon by the respondent-decree holder is a
decision of the Division Bench of this Court reported as AIR 1971 Delhi 227
Bakshi Lochan Singh & Ors. v Jathedar Santokh Singh & Ors.

60\. The facts of the said case were that the respondent had filed a suit
under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 against the appellants
in the original side of this Court. Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 requires the suit to be filed in the 'principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction'. The valuation of suit was fixed in the plaint at rupees two
lakh fifty thousand. One of the contentions advanced before the Division bench
was that this court had no jurisdiction to try the said suit in view of the
fact that the 'Court of District Judge' is the 'principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction' in Delhi. After noting the provisions of Section 24 of
Punjab Courts Act and Section 5(2) of Delhi High Court Act it was held by the
Division Bench that for the purposes of Section 92 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, the High Court of Delhi shall be the 'principal Civil Court
of original jurisdiction' qua suits, the value of which exceed fifty thousand
rupees (the valuation of suits prescribed in Section 5(2) was rupees fifty
thousand at the time of passing of the said judgment) and that the 'Court of
District Judge' would be the 'principal Civil Court' in the other suits.

61\. With deepest respect to the views expressed by the Division- Bench, we
find no reasoning in the judgment to indicate as to how the jurisdiction of
the High Court as contemplated under Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act,
1966 could lead to the conclusion that the High Court of Delhi is the
'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction' for suits valued above the
prescribed amount. As observed by us earlier, EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 18 of 29
Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act employs the expression 'ordinary
original civil jurisdiction' in relation to the jurisdiction conferred by it
upon the High Court of Delhi and there is nothing to equate the same as
'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction'. In our understanding, the
raison d'être of the said decision is that in view of the mandate of the non-
obstante clause contained in the Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act,
1966, the High Court of Delhi enjoys exclusive competence to try suits, the
value of which exceed rupees fifty thousand, as contemplated then. As
highlighted earlier the said case pertained to institution of a suit under
Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and since the plaint in the
said suit was valued at rupees two lakh fifty thousand the High Court was
rightly held to be competent to try the said suit. This Court while rendering
its decision was not concerned with the interpretation of Section 44A of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which deals with execution of foreign decrees
and not trial of suits, to which the mandate of Section 5 (2) of the Delhi
High Court Act, 1966 applies. It is a settled proposition that 'execution' is
distinct from the expression 'suit' and the same is not subsumed therein.
Reliance may be placed upon the decision of the Division Bench of this Court
reported as 2008 (105) DRJ 408 Morepen Laboratories Ltd. & Ors. v Morgan
Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd. Therefore, the dictum of this Court in Bakshi
Lochan Singh's (supra) is of no assistance in determination of the controversy
at hand.

62\. Reliance was also placed upon the decision of a Single Judge of this
Court reported as (1976) ILR 1 Del 95 Mary Assumption v Vincent Manual
Trinidade & Ors.

63\. In the said case, one of the questions which was considered by this Court
was whether the 'District Court' was competent to entertain the EFA (OS)
No.3/2014 Page 19 of 29 'petition' under Section 276 of the Indian Successions
Act, 1925 for grant of Letters of Administration. After noting that Section
2(bb) of the Indian Successions Act defines the 'District Judge' to mean Judge
of a 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction' and provisions of
Section 5(2) of Delhi High Court Act, 1976 it was held that the 'ordinary
original civil jurisdiction' envisaged in Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court
Act, 1966 has relation to 'every suit' and the non-obstante clause contained
in sub- section (2) of Section 5 of the Delhi High Court Act operates only in
relation to provisions contained in any law with regard to jurisdiction of
Courts vis-à-vis suits and leaves other jurisdictions including testamentary
and intestate jurisdictions untouched.

64\. We may note that the said decision is in fact in consonance with our view
that the non-obstante clause comprised under Section 5(2) of the Delhi High
Court Act, 1966 applies only to suits and not any other proceedings such as
execution of foreign decrees in terms of Section 44A of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.

65\. Similarly reliance was also placed upon another decision of a Single
Judge of this Court reported as AIR 1986 Delhi 78 R.P.Sachdeva v. State.

66\. In the said case, one of the questions arising for the consideration of
this Court was whether the 'District Judge' was competent to entertain the
petition under Section 370 and 372 of Indian Succession Act, 1925 for grant of
succession certificate. Section 371 of Indian Succession Act prescribes that a
petition for grant of succession certificate can be filed in the 'Court of the
District Judge' within whose jurisdiction the deceased ordinarily resided.
Section 2(bb) of Indian Succession Act defines 'District Judge' to mean the
Judge of a 'principal EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 20 of 29 Civil Court of original
jurisdiction'. After take into consideration the provisions of Section 24 of
Punjab Courts Act and Section 5(2) of Delhi High Court Act it was held by the
learned Single Judge that the jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi envisaged in
Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act is only in respect of suits, the
value of which exceeds rupees one lakh and the same would not make the High
Court of Delhi a 'principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction' in Delhi. It
was thus held that the High Court of Delhi is not competent to entertain
petitions seeking grant of succession certificate. Yet again, this decision is
in consonance of the view taken by us in the present case.

67\. We may now advert our attention to a decision of a learned Single Judge
of this Court reported as 2006 VII AD (Delhi) 863 Oakwell Engineering Ltd. v
Enernorth Industries Inc. upon which much emphasis was laid by the learned
Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-decree holder.

68\. In the said case, one of the questions which had arisen for adjudication
before the learned Single Judge of this Court was whether the High Court of
Delhi is competent to execute a decree passed by a 'foreign Court' in terms of
Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908\. After noting the decisions
of this Court in Bakshi Lochan Singh and R.P.Sachdeva‟s cases (Supra), the
learned Single Judge was of the view that the High Court was competent to
execute the decree passed by the foreign Court for the reason the decree which
was sought to be executed was a money decree which can be obtained in a suit.
It was held that for the purposes of Section 44A of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 the High Court of Delhi is a 'District Court' and thus
competent to entertain petition under Section 44A of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.

EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 21 of 29

69\. In our considered view, the learned Single Judge failed to properly
analyze the ratio laid down by this Court in Bakshi Lochan Singh and R.P
Sachdeva's case (supra) that the jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi
envisaged in Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act is only in respect of
suits, the value of which exceeds a prescribed amount and the same would not
make the High Court of Delhi a 'principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction' in Delhi. Furthermore, it would be pertinent to notice that
though the Single Judge correctly observed that Section 44A of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 makes no mention of jurisdiction to try and that there
is no requirement under Section 44A of the Code that the 'District Court' in
which the foreign decree is presented for execution should be also a Court
which could have entertained the suit, yet erroneously arrived at the
conclusion that High Court of Delhi is a 'District Court' as envisaged under
Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

70\. It would also be necessary for us to take note of a judgment rendered by
the Supreme Court of India in the decision reported as AIR 2000 SC 2826 M.V.
Al. Quamar v. Tsavliris Salvage (International) Ltd. The decision has been
relied upon by learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-
decree holder to demonstrate that a petition for execution of a foreign decree
preferred before the Andhra Pradesh High Court was held maintainable.

71\. At the outset we may proceed to notice the factual conspectus of the case
and the issues which fell for consideration of their Lordships, in order to
appreciate the observations contained in the said judgment.

72\. The matter before the Supreme Court arose from the Andhra Pradesh High
Court wherein an Execution Petition was filed before a EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page
22 of 29 learned Single Judge in terms of Section 15 of the Admiralty Courts
Act and Section 44A read with Order XXI Rule 10 of the of Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 for executing the decree issued by the High Court of Justice
Queens Bench Division Admiralty Court in an action by the salvaging company
(decree-holder) against the owner of the vessel - M.V.AL QUAMAR ex AL TABITH
at the relevant time of contract (judgment-debtor), claiming damages for
repudiation of an L.O.F. salvage contract. It may be highlighted that at the
time of preferring the Execution Petition the vessel of the judgment-debtor
was located in the territorial waters of Andhra Pradesh.

73\. Pending the Execution Petition, the decree-holder (respondent No.1 before
the Supreme Court) prayed for an interlocutory order for the issuance of a
warrant of arrest against the vessel together with Hull, tackle Engines,
Machinery equipment's, stores etc. The learned Single Judge of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court granted an interim order as prayed for on a prima facie
view of the matter that the Execution Petition can be filed in the High Court
which is otherwise having original admiralty jurisdiction. Aggrieved thereof,
the subsequent owner of the vessel (Appellant before the Supreme Court) filed
a petition before the Andhra Pradesh High Court to vacate the interim order
principally on the ground that the ownership of the ship having been
transferred bona fide and for valuable consideration to Quamar Shipping Ltd.,
the ship as attached in terms of the order of the Court cannot possibly be
kept under attachment in execution of the decree against the original owner
(Respondent No.2 before the Supreme Court).

74\. The learned Single Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court was pleased to
record that the matter in issue involved eminently an EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page
23 of 29 arguable case as regards the maintainability of the Execution
Petition. The issue of maintainability of the Execution Petition was decided
by the Bench of the Chief Justice of the Andhra Pradesh High Court against the
subsequent owner; who preferred Special Leave Petition before the Supreme
Court of India laying challenge to the maintainability of the Execution
Petition before the Andhra Pradesh High Court.

75\. The judgment was pronounced by a Division Bench of the Supreme Court of
India, comprising Mr.Justice S.B.Majumdar and Mr.Justice U.C.Banerjee. The
main judgment in the matter was delivered by Mr.Justice U.C.Banerjee, and a
separate concurring opinion was authored by Mr.Justice S.B.Majumdar, J.

76\. For gaining better understanding of the context in which the judgment was
delivered, we feel apposite to concatenate the contentions canvassed by the
learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant before the Supreme
Court. They were:-

(i) The invocation of Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 at the
instance of decree holder to execute a decree passed by the Admiralty Court is
misconceived, as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is not applicable to
Admiralty jurisdiction in view of Section 112 of the Code;

(ii) The judgment of the English Court cannot be termed to be judgment in
personam and therefore the Execution Petition for the arrest of the vessel is
not maintainable;

(iii) Section 44A is not a self contained code for the execution of a decree,
the same being not exhaustive and has to be read along with well settled
principles of common law in matters relating to execution of decree for a sum
of money; and EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 24 of 29

(iv) The fundamental principles of execution of domestic decrees comprised in
Section 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 also apply to Section 44A and
in view thereof the Andhra Pradesh High Court is not a competent court which
can entertain execution proceedings under Section 44A of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908\.

77\. Therefore, it was in light of the above highlighted submissions that the
Hon'ble Supreme Court proceeded adjudication.

78\. It would be pertinent for us to highlight that Mr.Justice U.C.Banerjee,
at the very outset in his lead judgment delineated the issue arising for
consideration. The relevant observations are reproduced herein below:-

> "Assumption of Admiralty jurisdiction by Andhra Pradesh High Court and
> passing of an order of arrest in execution of a judgment and decree of the
> High Court of Justice Queens Bench Division, Admiralty Court in London in
> case No. 1994 Folio No. 1693 dated 9.11.1988, is the key issue for
> discussion in these appeals by the grant of special leave."(Emphasis
> supplied)

79\. Similarly Mr.Justice S.B.Majumdar, in his separate concurring opinion
also significantly observed:-

> "I have gone through the erudite and exhaustive judgment prepared by learned
> Brother, U.C.Banerjee, J., in these appeals. I respectfully agree with the
> conclusion reached by him. However, as the matter at issue has wide
> repercussions regarding the scope and ambit or admiralty jurisdiction vested
> in the Chartered High Courts or their successor High Courts, like the High
> Court of Andhra Pradesh, I deem it fit to record my reasons for concurring
> with the decision arrived at by learned brother."(Emphasis supplied) EFA
> (OS) No.3/2014 Page 25 of 29 xxx Therefore, we find that at the heart of the
> controversy before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, lay the Admiralty jurisdiction
> of the Andhra Pradesh High Court which had been invoked by the decree holder
> and thus the maintainability of the Execution Petition before the Andhra
> Pradesh High Court in its Admiralty jurisdiction fell for Lordships precise
> consideration which was tested solely on the anvils of the contentions
> summarized by us in paragraph _____.

80\. In this regard it may be noticed that Mr.Justice U.C.Banerjee, in
paragraph 21-25 of his judgment traced the origins of the Admiralty
jurisdiction vested with the Chartered High Courts and observed that after re-
organisation of states, Andhra Pradesh High Court was conferred with similar
Admiralty jurisdiction as was previously enjoyed by the Madras High Court for
the said territory.

81\. It assumes significance that no submissions were advanced at the bar and
therefore there is no finding with regard to the issue whether a 'High Court'
can be construed as a 'District Court' in terms of Section 44A of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908. Furthermore, it is palpably evident that the Supreme
Court was not seized with a case pertaining to the jurisdiction of the High
Court of Delhi, which is governed by peculiar provisions contained in the
Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and the Punjab Courts Act, 1918. Thus, the Supreme
Court had no occasion to interpret the expression 'District Court' occurring
in Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in light of Section 2(4)
of the Code, Section 24 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 and Section 3(17) of
the General Clauses Act, 1897. We have no hesitation in concluding that no
benefit can be availed by the respondent-decree holder by placing reliance on
the said EFA (OS) No.3/2014 Page 26 of 29 judgment as the issues arising for
our consideration were neither agitated before the Supreme Court and were
therefore, not decided by the Court.

82\. Apropos the submission that the High Court of Delhi would be the only
'court of competent jurisdiction' in Delhi to execute the present decree in
view of the mandate of Section 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 read
with Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and therefore it ought to
be understood as the 'District Court' in terms of Section 44A of the Code, it
may be stated that the luminous observations of the Supreme Court of India in
M.V. Al. Quamar's case (Supra) clearly negate the said submission as it has
been observed that the requirement that the 'transferee Court‟ must be a
competent court and should be shown to have jurisdiction to pass such a decree
even originally is conspicuously absent in Section 44A. It was further held
that Section 44A indicates an independent right conferred on a foreign decree-
holder for enforcement of its decree in India. It is a fresh cause of action
and has no co-relation with jurisdictional issues. The scheme of Section 44A
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is alien to the scheme of domestic
execution as provided under Section 39 (3) of the Code wherein the 'transferee
Court' must be otherwise competent to assume jurisdiction. It was further
observed that Section 44A is endowed with an in-built scheme of execution,
which is all together distinct, and not comparable with the scheme envisaged
under Section 39(3).

83\. The said observations of the Supreme Court are a complete answer to the
contention urged by the respondent/decree holder. It is clear that the
legislature has consciously in its wisdom chosen not to infuse the conception
of 'competent jurisdiction' in Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in contra-distinction to Section 39 which provides EFA (OS) No.3/2014
Page 27 of 29 the mechanism for execution of 'domestic decrees'. The
requirements saddled on the executing court under the scheme of Section 39 are
alien to the 'District Court‟; the jurisdiction of which may be invoked by the
holder of a foreign decree in terms of Section 44A. Rather it may be
pertinently observed that the legislature has vested such 'District Court' the
power to execute the 'foreign decree' as if it had been passed by itself. The
conception of 'competence of jurisdiction' of executing court contained in
Section 39 being wholly absent in the language employed by the legislature in
Section 44A of the Code, the same cannot be circuitously injected by this
Court as the same would tantamount to legislative re-writing, which is
impermissible.

84\. The authoritative observations of the Supreme Court referred above
unequivocally evince that the jurisdiction of the 'District Court' in terms of
Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 can be invoked by a holder of
a decree of a Superior Court of reciprocating territory, unhindered by the
lack of jurisdictional competence of the said Court while dealing with the
execution of 'domestic decrees'.

85\. For the reasons extensively highlighted by us we are of the considered
view that the High Court of Delhi not being a 'District Court' in terms of
Section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is not vested with the
jurisdiction to entertain the present Execution Petition. In view thereof, the
same is liable to be transferred to the 'Court of District Judge‟ within whose
jurisdiction the property sought to be attached is situated for being dealt
with in accordance with law.

86\. The appeal is allowed. The impugned order dated November 29, 2013 is set
aside in so far it is held that the Delhi High Court would be the 'District
Court' to execute the foreign decree. Needless to state EFA (OS) No.3/2014
Page 28 of 29 decision on the objections on merits is also set aside being
without jurisdiction. The executing Court shall decide the objections
uninfluenced by any observation made by the learned Single Judge on merits.
The Execution Applications filed by the appellants are restored save and
except the application which challenged the jurisdiction of this Court, which
application is allowed.

87\. The Registry shall transmit the Execution Petition and the applications
which are revived to the Court of concerned District Judge and for which an
application would be submitted in the Registry by the decree holder intimating
the Court to which the Execution Petition has to be transmitted.

88\. Parties shall bear their own costs all throughout.

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG) JUDGE (JAYANT NATH) JUDGE JULY 01, 2014 mamta EFA (OS)
No.3/2014 Page 29 of 29

