

Andhra High Court

Andhra Cement Co. Ltd. vs Regional Provident Fund ... on 8 September, 1987

Equivalent citations: (1988) IILLJ 453 AP

Bench: S Reddy

ORDER

1\. The Petitioner, Andhra Cement Company Limited, seeks to issue a writ of
certiorari to quash the proceedings dated May 6, 1982 of the Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner, Hyderabad.

2\. The relevant circumstances in which the impugned proceedings have been
issued may be set out : The petitioner-Company, incorporated under the Indian
Companies Act, established a cement factory known as 'Andhra Cement Factory'
at Vijayawada in the year 1938. In the year 1978 the management established
another factory styled 'Visakha Cement Work's at Visakhapatnam. The State
Government allowed interest-free sales tax loans, a rebate of 25% in power
tariff and other facilities as incentives to the new industry. The
Commissioner of Labour also recognised it as a separate establishment. The
service conditions are totally different from the service conditions of the
workmen working in Andhra Cement Factory. The employment also was different.
75 per cent. of the wages as recognised by the Central Wage Board were also
being paid from 1st November 1979. The workmen accepted the same. Separate
balance sheet and separate accounts are maintained for the new establishment.

3\. The Parliament, with a view to encourage the growth of industries,
exempted new establishments from the coverage of the Provident Fund Act for an
infancy period of 3 years or 5 years, as the case may be, and so, Visakha
Cement Works is not governed by the provisions of the Provident Fund Act for a
period of three years from 1st November 1979.

4\. However, on the representation made by the employees of Andhra Cement
Factory, the A.P. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, the 1st respondent
herein, issued proceedings dated May 6, 1982 advising the petitioner-Company
to cover the employees of Visakha Cement Works under the Provident Fund,
treating it as part and parcel of Andhra Cement Factory. Thereupon, the
petitioner - Company made a representation to the Government of India under
Section 19-A of the Employees Provident Fund Act (for short 'the Act') stating
that Visakha Cement Works is a new establishment and, therefore, it is
entitled for exemption under Section 16 of the Act for the infancy benefit of
three years, as it cannot be considered as a branch of Andhra Cement Factory.
The said representation, however, was turned down. Hence, this writ petition.

5\. The main question that is involved is whether there is a functional
integrality between Andhra Cement Factory, Vijayawada and Visakha Cement Works
at Visakhapatnam even though the management is common ?

6\. The argument advanced for the proposition is that there is absolutely no
functional integrity between the two units; they are two separate and
independent units and one has nothing to do with the other. The following are
the circumstances that have been enumerated :

(1) Visakha Cement Works has been considered and treated as a separate
industrial establishment by the Joint Commissioner of Labour and a new set of
standing orders from that of Andhra Cement Factory are framed under the
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946.

(2). Section 16 of the Employees Provident Fund Act is meant to provide
incentive benefit for the new factory, whether there is any nexus to the
proprietorship of the establishment or not.

(3) There was a separate profit and loss accont and balance sheet prepared and
maintained for the two establishments.

(4) The new unit does not depend upon the functioning of the other, and so
there is no functional dependence.

(5) There is no unity of employment and so, there is no functional integrity.

7\. The arguments advanced on behalf of the respondents are :

(1) It is true that the new unit has got a new licence and is registered as a
new factory and the State Government has allowed a rebate of 25% in power
tariff and is recognised by the Labour Commissioner as a separate new
establishment. That does not, however, alter the situation.

(2) Out of 120 employees working in the Visakhapatnam unit, 100 are members of
the main unit employees union which has got its office at Vijayawada.

(3) Initially in the years 1979 and 1980 the clinker which was required by the
Visakha Cement Works was supplied by the petitioner as mentioned in the annual
reports of the petitioner's establishment for the years 1980-81 and 1981-82.
Further the annual report for the year 1981-82 refers the petitioner's said
unit as mother clinker plant. These two units in fact have been clubbed for
the purpose of the Social Security Enactment.

(4) One balance sheet is drawn up in respect of both the establishments.

(5) There is a common pool of top officers, such as Managing Director, General
Manager, to recruit and employ the employees for both the units. Officers of
both the units are inter-transferable.

(6) In view of the same, the new unit was considered only as a branch to the
unit of the petitioner's establishment and so, is not entitled to fresh
infancy protection contemplated under Section 16.

(7) The factors to be borne in mind in determining whether enterprises
constitute one establishment are (i) unity of ownership, management and
control, (ii) functional integrity or general unity and (iii) unity of
employment.

8\. Section 2-A of the Employees Provident Fund Act reads :

"Establishment to include all departments and branches. - For the removal of
doubts, it is hereby declared that where an establishment consists of
different departments or has branches, whether situate in the same place or in
different places, all such departments or branches shall be treated as part of
the same establishment."

9\. Section 16(1)(b) of the Act, which is relevant in this behalf, reads :

"Act not to apply to certain establishments - (1) This Act shall apply -

(a) ..........

(b) to any other establishment employing fifty or more persons or twenty or
more, but less than fifty, persons until the expiry of three years in the case
of the former and five years in the case of the latter, from the date on which
the establishments is, or has been, set up.

Exaplanation. - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that an
establishment shall not be deemed to be newly set up merely by reason of a
charge in its location."

10\. The case law in this behalf be now noticed.

11\. In Associated Cement Co. v. Their Workmen the Supreme Court held
(1960-I-LLJ-I at 8-9) :

"The Act (Industrial Disputes Act) not having prescribed any specific tests
for determining what is 'one establishment', we must fall back on such
considerations as in the ordinary industrial or business sense determine the
unity of an industrial establishment, having regard no doubt to the scheme and
object of the Act and other relevant provisions of the Mines Act, 1952, or the
Factories Act, 1948. What then is 'one establishment' in the ordinary
industrial or business sense ? The question of unity or oneness, presents
difficulties when the industrial establishment consists of parts, units,
departments, branches etc. If it is strictly unitary in the sense of having
one location and one unit only, there is little difficulty in saying that it
is one establishment. Where, however, the industrial undertaking has parts,
branches, departments, units etc., with different locations, near or distant,
the question arises what tests should be applied for determining what
constitutes 'one establishment'. Several tests were referred to in the course
of arguments before us, such as, geographical proximity, unity of ownership,
management and control, unity of employment and conditions of service,
functional integrality, general unity of purpose etc. To most of these we have
referred while summarising the evidence of Mr. Dongray and the findings of the
Tribunal thereon. It is, perhaps, impossible to lay down any one test as an
absolute and invariable test for all cases. The real purpose of these tests is
to find out the true relation between the parts, branches, units, etc. If in
their true relation they constitute one integrated whole, we say that the
establishment is one; if on the contrary they do not constitute one integrated
whole, each unit is then a separate unit. How the relation between the units
will be judged must depend on the facts proved, having regard to the scheme
and object of the statute which gives the right of un-employment compensation
and also prescribes a disqualification therefor. Thus, in one case the unity
of ownership, management and control may be the important test; in another
case functional integrality or general unity may be the important test; and in
still another case, the important test may be the unity of employment. Indeed,
in a large number of cases several tests may fall for consideration at the
same time. The difficulty or applying these tests arises because of the
complexities of modern industrial organisation; many enterprises may have
functional integrality between factories which are separately owned; some may
be integrated in part with units or factories having the same ownership and in
part with factories or plants which are independently owned. In the midst of
all these complexities it may be difficult to discover the real thread of
unity. In an American decision Danald L. Nordlong v. Ford Motor Company,
(1950) 28 ALR 2d. 272) there is an example of an industrial product consisting
of 3800 or 4000 parts, about 900 of which came out of one plant; some came
from other plants owned by the same Company and still others came from plants
independently owned, and a shutdown caused by a strike or other labour dispute
at any one of the plants might conceivably cause a closure of the main plant
or factory."

Further held :

"Fortunately for us, such complexities do not present themselves in the case
under our consideration. We do not say that it is usual in industrial practice
to have one establishment consisting of a factory and a mine; but we have to
remember the special facts of this case where the adjacent limestone quarry
supplies the raw material, almost exclusively, to the factory; the quarry is
indeed a feeder of the factory and without limestone from the quarry, the
factory cannot function. Ours is a case where all the tests are fulfilled, as
shown from the evidence given on behalf of the appellant to which we have
earlier referred. There are unity of ownership, unity of management,
supervision and control, unity of finance and employment, unity of labour and
conditions of service of workmen, functional integrality, general unity of
purpose and geographical proximity. We shall presently deal with the legal
difficulties at which the Tribunal has hinted and which have been elaborated
by learned counsel for the respondent. But apart from them, the only fair
conclusion from the facts proved in the case is that the Chaibasa Cement Works
consisting of the factory and the limestone quarry form one establishment. The
existence of two sets of Standing Orders and a separate attendance register
for the limestone quarry have already been adverted to. They have been
sufficiently explained by Mr. Dongray, particularly the existence of two sets
of Standing Orders by reason of the statutory requirement of approval by
different authorities - one set by the Labour Commissioner, Bihar and the
other by the relevant Central authority."

12\. In Pratap Press, etc., v. Their Workmen (1960-I-LLJ-497 at 498) the
Supreme Court held :

"The question whether the two activities in which the single owner is engaged
are one industrial unit or two distinct industrial units is not always easy of
solution. No hard-and-fast rule can be laid down for the decision of the
question and each case has to be decided on its own peculiar facts. In some
cases the two activities each of which by itself comes within the definition
of "industry" are so closely linked together that no reasonable man would
consider them as independent industries. There may be other cases where the
connexion between the two activities is not by itself sufficient to justify an
answer one way or the other, but the employer's own conduct in mixing up or
not mixing up the capital, staff and management may often provide a certain
answer."

Further held at pp. 499-500 :

In Associated Cement Company v. Their Workmen (1960-I-LLJ-1) this Court had to
consider the question whether the employers' defence to a claim for lay-off
compensation by the workers of the Chaibasa Cement Works that laying off was
due to a strike in another part of the establishment viz., limestone quarry at
Rajanka, was good. In other words, the question was whether the limestone
quarry at Rajanka formed part of the establishment known as the Chaibasa
Cement Works within the meaning of S. 25E(iii) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
While pointing out that it was impossible to lay down any one test as an
absolute and invariable test for all cases, it observed that the real purpose
of those tests would be to find out the true relation between the parts,
branches, units, etc. This Court, however, mentioned certain tests which might
be useful in deciding whether two units form part of the same establishment.
Unity of owner-ship, unity of management and control, unity of finance and
unity of labour, unity of employment and unity of functional "integrality"
were the tests which the Court applied in that case. It is obvious there is an
essential difference between the question whether the two units form part of
one establishment for the purposes of Section 25-E(iii) and the question
whether they form part of one single industry for the purposes of calculation
of the surplus profits for distribution of bonus to workmen in one of the
units. Some assistance can still nevertheless be obtained from the enumeration
of the tests in that case. Of all these tests the most important appears to us
to be that of functional "integrality" and the question of unity of finance
and employment and of labour. Unity of ownership exists ex-hypothesis. Where
two units belong to a proprietor, there is almost always likelihood also of
unity of management. In all such cases, therefore, the Court has to consider
with care how far there is "functional integrality" meaning thereby such
functional interdependence that one unit cannot exist conveniently and
reasonably without the other and on the further question whether in matters of
finance and employment the employer has actually kept the two units distinct
or integrated."

In Ramakrishna Rao v. State Of Kerala (1969-II-LLJ-682 at 684) the Supreme
Court held :

"Now that question in this case is that Hotel Brinda commenced only on Jan.
15, 1959 and the number of employees then exceeded 20 for the first time.
Under the provisions of Section 16 an exemption from the Act and the Scheme is
claimed for five years and it is submitted no offence was committed because
the establishment even if taken together could not be subjected to the
provisions till a period of five years had expired from January 15, 1959."

Also held at pp. 684-685 :

"In support of this argument Mr. B. R. L. Iyengar emphasises that the use of
the participle 'employing' in Section 1(3)(b) shows some continuity of
employment of 20 persons and not the first point of time when that number is
reached. He contends that it is always intended that a period of 3 or 5 years,
as the case may be, must elapse before the provisions of the Act and the
Scheme are made applicable. This is an ingenious way of putting the matter but
is not admissible. The language of Section 16(1)(b) is very precise. The last
thirteen words of the clause 'from the date on which the establishment is or
has been set up', show both cases where the establishment is new and where the
establishment is old. The word 'is' shows that a new establishment is meant
and the words 'has been' show that the establishment existed before the number
is reached. If it was intended to apply the clause to new establishment the
words 'is set up' would have been sufficient. The construction sought to be
placed would render the words 'has been' otiose. Further the scheme of
paragraph 26 quoted earlier relates to a period of service and this qualifying
period may be in the past as well as in the future. The intention behind
Section 16 read with paragraph 26 quite clearly shows that the period is
intended to give a breathing time to new establishments. That reason does not
hold when the establishment is already old and well founded. The use of the
participle is therefore immaterial. Whether a present perfect tense or a
participle be used the meaning is the same Clause (b) of Section 1(3) which
uses the participle and clause (a) of the same Section employs the present
perfect tense both merely describe the establishments and convey no different
meanings. The conclusion of the High Court was thus right. The appeals fail
and will be dismissed."

14\. The Supreme Court in Indian Cable Co., Ltd., v. Its Workmen held
(1962-I-LLJ-409 at 417, 419) :

"Having regard to the popular sense of the words "industrial establishment" or
to the limitation of relief under Section 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act
to workmen in the same category, the conclusion would appear to be inescapable
that each branch of a company would normally be regarded as a distinct
industrial establishment for the purposes of applying the principles embodied
in Section 25G of the Industrial Disputes Act. Having regard to the principles
deducible from the language of the Section already stated (Section 25G) the
decisive elements in our judgment are the location of the establishment and
the functional integrality i.e., the existence of one code relating to the
categories of workmen and their scales of wages."

15\. In Workmen v. Straw Board Manufacturing Company the Supreme Court held
(1974-I-LLJ-499 at 507-508) :

"After giving due consideration to all the aspects pointed out by the learned
counsel for the appellants, we are unable to hold that the R. Mill is not an
independently functioning unit and that there is any functional integrality as
such between the R. Mill and the S. Mill. The fact of the unity of ownership,
supervision and control and some other common features, which we have noticed
above, do not justify a contrary conclusion on this aspect in the present
case. There is considerable force in the submission of Mr. Chitaley that the
R. Mill is a different line of business and the closure of the S. Mill has
nothing to do with the functionaing of the R. Mill. The matter may be
absolutely different when in an otherwise going concern or a functioning unit
some workmen's services are terminated as being redundant or surplus to
requirements. That most of the conditions of service of the two Mills were
substantially indentical can be easily explained by the fact that, being owned
by the same employer and two units being situated in close proximity, it will
not be in the interest of the management and peace and well-being of the
company to treat the employees differently creating heart-burning and
discrimination. For the same reason, there is no particular significance in
this case even in the application of the standing orders of the company to the
employees of the R. Mill which, because of the non-requisite number of
employees employed in the latter, is not even required under the law to have
separate standing orders. It is, in our opinion, a clear case of closure of an
independent unit of a company and not a closure of a part of an establishment.
Even so, this kind of closure cannot be treated as lay-off or lock-out under
the U.P. Act. The S. Mill was intended to be closed and was in fact closed
and, therefore, the question of lay-off under Section 2-N of the U.P. Act does
not arise. Similarly it is also not a case of lock-out within the meaning of
Section 2-0 of the U.P. Act. In both lay-off and lock-out the unit is not
closed completely and there is also no intention of the employer to close the
concern."

16\. In Sayaji Mills Limited v. Regional P.F. Commissioner it is held
(1985-I-LLJ-238 at 242) :

"This is not a case where the old factory was reduced into scrap and a new
factory was erected in its place. Nor can it be said that there was total
discontinuity brought about between the old factory and the factory which was
restarted after the appellant purchased it. The stoppage of production was
brought about temporarily as stated earlier by the winding up order and the
factory was restarted after it was sold to the appellant by the Official
Liquidator. The finding of fact recorded by the trial Court in this case which
is affirmed by the High Court clearly establishes that it was the same old
factory which recommenced production on November 12, 1955. What is of
significance is that a substantial number of workmen and staff who were
working under the former management had been employed by the appellant though
it is claimed that they had entered into new contracts of employment. Mere
investment of additional capital or effecting of repairs to the existing
machinery before it was restarted, the diversification of the lines of
production or change of ownership would not amount to the establishment of a
new factory attracting the exemption under Section 16(1)(b) of the Act for a
fresh period of three years"

Also held :

"On behalf of the appellants, reliance was placed on the decision of this
Court in Provident Fund Inspector, Trivandrum v. Secretary, N.S.S. Co-
operative Society, Changanacherry, (1979-II-LLJ-693). That was a case in which
the Secretary of a Co-operative Society which owned a press had been acquitted
by the Magistrate of the charge of not complying with the provisions of the
Act. The High Court had confirmed the order of acquittal. On appeal this Court
found that there was no ground to interfere with the acquittal. The defence of
the accused in that case was that the Co-op. Society of which he was the
Secretary had acquired the press in question in Mar. 1961 and had established
a new press subsequently and hence the Act was not applicable to the press as
the period of three years prescribed by S. 16(1)(b) of the Act had not
expired. The evidence in that case showed that after the purchase, a new owner
had come in the place of the former owner, the work of the press was stopped
on the date of its sale and was started again after a break of three months,
the machinery in the press was also altered and the persons employed
previously were not continued in service. While a fresh recruitment of workmen
had taken place, out of those workmen only six happened to be the former
employees and compensation had been paid to the workmen at the time of the
sale by the former owner. On these facts it was held that a new establishment
had come into existence. In the case before us, it is seen that about 70% of
the former workmen had been employed by the appellant and there was no change
of machinery. Further this is a case where the interruption of work had taken
place owing to the order in the winding up proceedings. It is relevant to
state here that this Court in the course of its judgment in the above case did
not overrule the decision of the Calcutta High Court in Bharat Board Mills
Ltd. (1958-I-LLJ-285) but only distinguished it. The facts of that case more
or less corresponded to the facts of the case before us. It is true that this
Court in the above decision approved the decision of the Madras High Court in
Vithaldas Jagannathadas v. Regional Provident Fund Commr. Madras
(1966-I-LLJ-240), but that does not make any difference so far as the case
before us is concerned since in the Madras case there was a finding that in
reality the old establishment had come to an end and there was a new
establishment. In the case before us, the finding of fact of the trial Court
is to the contrary. The learned trial judge had held that the intention in
this case was to maintain the continuity of the old factory. Hence the
decision on which reliance is placed being distinguishable on facts is not of
much use to the appellant."

17\. In Isha Steel Treatment, Bombay v. Association of Engg. Workers the
Supreme Court held : (1987-I-LLJ-427 at 431-433) :

"In the above decision (Workmen v. Straw Board Mfg. C., (1974-I-LLJ-499) this
Court has held that the unity of ownership, supervision and control that
existed in respect of the two mills involved in that case and the fact that
the conditions of the service of the workmen of the two mills were
substantially identical were not by themselves sufficient in the eye of law to
hold that there was functional integrality between the two mills. It held that
it was a clear case of closure of an independent unit and not of a part of an
establishment. The decision of the learned single Judge of the High Court that
the fact that the two units were situate at a distance of 200 meters, the fact
that both the units were controlled by the same employer and that the business
of heat treatment processing carried on in the two units was identical had
left no room for doubt that the two units were really integral cannot be
sustained. The decision in S.G. Chemicals and Dyes Trading Employees' Union v.
S.G. Chemicals and Dyes Trading Limited (1986-I-LLJ-490) is not of much
assistance to the workmen. The management in that case was running its
business in Pharmaceuticals at three places. The Pharmaceutical Division was
at Worli, the Laboratory and Dyes Division was at Trombay and the Marketing
and Sales Division was at Churchgate. In 1984 the company which was managing
the said three divisions of business was sold out. As the buyers proposed to
handle the future sales of the Company through their own distribution
channels, they found that the services of the staff working at the Churchgate
office were no longer required. Therefore, the management closed down the
office ar Churchgate. The question was whether there was functional
integrality between the office at the Churchgate and the factory at Trombay.
This Court on a consideration of the material before it in that case, held
that the functions of the Churchgate division and the Trombay factory were
neither separate nor independent but were so integrally connected as to
constitute the Churchgate and the Trombay factory into one establishment,
because the Churchgate division used to purchase the raw material required by
the Trombay factory for producing or processing the goods, it used to market
and sell the goods so manufactured or processed by that factory and it also
used to disburse the salary and other employment benefits and maintain
accounts, etc. of the workmen. These were considered to be integral parts of
the manufacturing activities of the factory at Trombay, because the factory
could never have functioned independently without the Churchgate division
being there. It is not the case of the workmen in the present case that the II
Unit, could not continue to function after the closure of the I Unit. As
already mentioned, the II Unit is continuing to function as usual even now
notwithstanding the stoppage of the activities at the I Unit. The question of
application of S. 25-G of the Act arises only when the services of the workmen
are retrenched. In Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala (1980-II-LLJ-72) it
is laid down that if the termination of service of a workman in a given case
falls either under S. 25-FF or under S. 25FFF of the Act it would not be a
termination falling under S. 25-F of the Act. This Court has observed in that
case that after the enactment of S. 25-FF and S. 25-FFF retrenchment included
every kind of termination of service except those not expressly included in
Section 25F or not expressly provided for by other provisions of the Act such
as Ss. 25-FF and 25-FFF. Hence, if the case is one of genuine closure then the
question of applying S. 25-G of the Act which is applicable to a case of
retrenchment would not arise."

Further held :

"On a consideration of the entire material before it, the Tribunal had reached
the conclusion that the closure of the I Unit was bonafide, that it did not
have any functional integrality with the II Unite and that there was no
victimisation of workmen for their trade union activities. On going through
the award passed by the Tribunal we feel that it had not committed any error
in recording the said findings which called for interference at the hands of
the High Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution. We are satisfied that this
case is one of bona-fide closure of an independent unit of business. The
learned single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court were, therefore,
in error in holding that the termination of service of the workmen in this
case amounted to retrenchment and not closure and the case of the workmen had
to be considered on remand by the Tribunal in the light of S. 25-G of the Act.

They overlooked that it would result in a wholly unjust situation in which a
corresponding number of workmen in the II Unit would be prejudicially affected
even though they had nothing to do with the I Unit".

A broad criteria emerging out of the above conspectus of case law are : In
order to hold that different parts, units, branches and so forth are merely
constituents of one establishment, the salient features, which are enumerated
below, must be satisfied; this is, however, by entering a caveat that no hard
and fast rule could be laid down as to how many of the following shall have to
be satisfied - in other words each case has to be considered in the light of
its own circumstances as to whether it is a new establishment or a branch,
part or constituent of the old establishment. There cannot however be a
straight jacket formula.

(1) the Unity of ownership, management and control, unity of employment and
conditions of service, functional integrality and general unity of purpose.

(2) The connection between the two activities is not by itself sufficient to
justify an answer one way or the other, but the employer's own conduct in
mixing up or not mixing up the capital, staff and management may often provide
a certain answer.

(3) The real purpose of the tests is to find out the true relationship between
the two parts, branches, units etc. If they constitute one integrated whole,
we say that the establishment is one. If it is to the contrary, then each unit
is a separate one.

(4) In one case the unity of ownership, management and control may be the
important test; in another case functional integrality or general unity may be
the important test; and in still another case the important test may be the
unity of employment.

(5) Many enterprises may have functional integrality between factories which
are separately owned; some may be integrated in part with units or factories
having the same ownership and in part with factories or plants which are
independently owned. In the midst of all these complexities, it may be
difficult to discover the real thread of unity.

19\. Bearing in mind the above, the case on hand may now be examined.

20\. The undisputed facts are. The petitioner-Company established Andhra
Cement Factory at Vijayawada in 1938. In 1978, it established another factory
styled "Visakha Cement Works" at Visakhapatnam. This was registered as a
separate factory and as a separate management. A separate licence also was
granted. The State Government allowed interest-free sales tax loans and a
rebate of 25% in power tariff. The Commissioner of Labour also recognised it
as a separate establishment.

21\. The Central Government finally on representation by the petitioner-
Company passed the impugned order holding in substance that the Managing
Director and General Manager are one and and the same for both the units;
there is a management service pool consisting of managers, officers,
supervisors and other service personnel working in all the units. The officers
have been transferred from one unit to the other. Out of 120 employees in the
Visakhapatnam unit, 100 were stated to be members of the main unit at
Vijayawada. Initially in 1979 and 1980, the entire clinker was supplied by the
Vijayawada unit to the Visakhapatnam unit. The annual report of 1981-82 refers
to the Vijayawada unit as the mother clinkering plant. The petitioner has
itself referred to Visakha Cement Works as a unit and has advised in the
classified directory of members of the Andhra Chamber of Commerce that Visakha
Cement Works is a branch. Visakha Cement Works was started by the petitioner
pursuant to its companion scheme for setting up a clinkering unit. So the
Central Government held "in the face of all this overwhelming evidence, it is
clear that Visakha Cement Works is a branch of the petitioner-Company."

22\. It is true, it is not easy of solution in adjudicating whether the unit
is a branch of the main establishment or a separate establishment. But yet the
Court, in the face of set of given circumstances, must try to take the grain
out of the chaff.

23\. The question is whether the petitioner-Company is entitled to 'infancy
benefit' as postulated under Section 16 of the Employees Provident Fund Act.
The said Section reads :

"Act not to apply to certain establishments :- (1) This Act shall not apply -

(a) to any establishment registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912
or under any other law for the time being in force, in any State relating to
cooperative societies, employing less than fifty persons and working without
the aid of power; or

(b) to any other establishment employing fifty or more persons or twenty or
more, but less than fifty, persons until the expiry of three years in the case
of the former and five years in the case of the latter, from the date on which
the establishment is, or has been, set up.

(2) If the Central Government is of opinion that having regard to the
financial position of any class of establishments or other circumstances of
the case, it is necessary or expedient so do to, it may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be specified in
the notification, exempt that class of establishments from the operation of
this Act for such period as may be specified in the notification."

24\. In this case, however, it does not present with much difficulty. The
features as have been found by the Central Government based on material on
record are that the management is common, there is a management service pool,
officers have been transferred from one unit to the other and out of 120
employees in the new unit, 100 are members of the main unit. For a couple of
years, the entire clinker was supplied by the main unit to the new unit. By
reference in the annual report, Vijayawada unit has been styled as 'mother
clinkering plant'. Indeed it has been mentioned in the classified directory of
the members of the Andhra Cement Company as a branch of the Vijayawada unit.
The Area Inspector, after due examination, reported that the balance sheet,
income-tax and sales tax registration numbers, and provident fund account for
both the units are one and the same. Thus there is not only unity of ownership
but also unity of management and also to a great extent functional integrality
including the unity of employment. In the face of this wide coverage of the
common features, I have absolutely no hesitation in concluding that Visakha
Cement Works is a branch of the petitioner-Company and, therefore, cannot
claim the benefit of exemption as postulated under Section 16 of the Employees
Provident Fund Act for the infancy benefit. This is so notwithstanding the
fact that Visakha Cement Works has been registered separately, licensed
separately, granted interest-free sales tax loans as well as a rebate of 25%
in power tariff and also recognised by the Commissioner of Labour as a
separate unit, as these cannot be reckoned as contributing factors to be taken
as guidelines in finding whether the unit is a separate establishment or a
branch of the main unit.

25\. Hence in any judgment, the impugned order does not suffer from any
erroneous approach and so warrants no interference by certiorarising the same.
Resultantly, since the contentions advanced on behalf of the petitioner-
Company are devoid of merit and substance and so deserve to be rejected, the
writ petition is dismissed. No costs.

