

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi

Motorola Inc., Erisson Radio ... vs Deputy C.I.T. on 22 June, 2005

Equivalent citations: (2005) 96 TTJ Delhi 1

Bench: V Gandhi, R Easwar, Vice, P Parikh

ORDER

1\. All these cross appeals and cross objection in respect of the three
assesses are directed against the orders of the learned CIT (Appeals) in the
respective cases. Since common issues are involved in all these appeals, they
were heard together and are being disposed of by this consolidated order, for
the sake of convenience.

1.1. These matters were fixed before the Division Benches but at the instance
of the assesses and in the light of the importance of the issues involved, a
request was made to the Hon'ble President to refer the matter to a Special
Bench Under Section 255(4) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act). The
President, I.T.A.T after considering the facts and circumstances of the case,
decided to constitute a Special Bench. The following question was referred to
the Special Bench:

"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances, the revenues earned by the
appellant from supply of equipment and software to Indian Telecom Operators
were taxable in India?"

2\. It may be relevant to mention that the revenue had earlier opposed the
constitution of a Special Bench. The Revenue further opposed joining of
Ericsson and Nokia as parties before the Special Bench. However, subsequently
the learned counsel appearing for the revenue Shri G.C. Sharma, Sr. Advocate
agreed that a Special Bench may be constituted and the above mentioned two
assesses may also join as parties.

3\. Before the hearing started on 19th July, 2004, Mr. M.S. Syali, the learned
counsel for Motorola, referred to the assessee's application dated "Nil"
(received in the office of the Tribunal on 26.5.2004) and requested the Bench
that he be permitted to argue on the validity of the notice issued Under
Section 142(1) of the Act as entire appeals were to be heard by the Bench as
per directions dated 19.1.2004. Shri G.C. Sharma, learned counsel appearing
for the revenue, opposed the above request. It was argued by Shri Sharma that
only a specified question has been referred to and is to be considered by the
Special Bench. After hearing all the concerned parties at length, the Bench,
vide its order dated 20th July, 2004 directed that the entire appeals in all
the three cases will be heard by the Special Bench.

4\. Two major issues which arise in the appeals are:

(a) The validity of the notice issued under Section 142(1) of the Act, and

(b) The validity of the levy of interest under Sections 234A and 234B of the
Act.

The first issue arises only in the cases of Motorola and Ericsson, whereas the
second issue arises in, all the three cases namely Motorola, Ericsson and
Nokia. We propose to decide these two issues first and thereafter decide the
various grounds assessee-wise.

Validity of notice under Section 1420') ('Motorola & Ericsson).

5\. The first ground in the case of Motorola is against the validity of the
notice issued Under Section 142(1) of the Act. The said notice was issued on
3rd of November, 1999 and was served thereafter. The learned counsel for the
assessee submitted that the said notice should have been issued and served
within one year from the end of the previous year. The notice issued and
served after the above date was barred by limitation and hence the assessment
was vitiated.

5.1. Shri Syali referred to the provisions of Sub-sections (2) and (4) of
Section 139. He contended that before 1.4.1989 Sub-section (2) of Section 139
prescribed that the notice thereunder should be served before the end of the
assessment year. After 1.4.1989, Section 142(1) was amended to provide for
issue of notice calling for the return of income. According to Mr. Syali this
was a case of substitution of the earlier Section 139(2) and though Section
142(1) did not specify any time limit within which the notice should be
issued, his contention was that such a limitation was built in and should be
inferred paving regard to the scheme of the statute. Mr. Syali pointed out
that Section 142(1) provided for two situations namely:

(a) Where a return was filed Under Section 139(1) in which case the notice
Under Section 142(1) could call for further information and particulars, and

(b) Where time allowed Under Section 139(1) had expired and no return was
filed by the assessee, the notice Under Section 142(1) could call for a return
to be filed by the assessee.

6\. Shri M.S. Syali then referred to the decision of the Hyderabad Bench of
the Tribunal in the case of Dr. Vijaykumar Datla v. Asstt. CIT (58 ITD 339)
and of the Delhi Bench in the case of Sheraton International Inc. v. Dy. CIT
(85 ITD 110). Shri Syali pointed out that the Hyderabad Bench while deciding
the matter had taken all the relevant provisions of the law into
consideration. The decision of the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal, on the other
hand, was per incuriam as the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the
relevant statutory provisions were not discussed. Shri Syali at the same time
added that both the Benches agree that some period of limitation has to be
read in the statutory provision and it is not possible to hold that the notice
Under Section 142(1) could be issued at any time. Shri Syali referred to the
decision in the case of Iswara Bhat v. Commissioner of Agricultural Income-tax
(200 ITR 238 (Ker.)) to contend that even in the absence of a time limit
prescribed by law, any proceedings have to be initiated and completed within a
reasonable time. Where no time limit is prescribed for the completion of the
proceedings, the logic that the repository of the power shall initiate the
proceedings within a reasonable time should apply and the final order should
be passed within a reasonable time, even in the absence of a time limit in the
statute concerned. The Kerala High Court held that both initiation and
completion of the proceedings stand on the same footing.

6.1. Mr. M.S. Syali referred to Explanation 2(a) to Section 147 of the Act
which deems certain cases to be cases of escaped assessment. Under this
provision, a case where no return of income has been furnished by the assessee
although the total income or the total income of any other person in respect
of which he is assessable under the Act exceeded the maximum amount not
chargeable to income-tax would also be deemed to be a case of escaped
assessment. From this provision, the learned counsel sought to contend that
there is a point at which the income escaping assessment is fixed, and any
notice Under Section 142(1) could be given only before that point is reached,
in the case of escaped assessment, the only remedy with the revenue is to
issue notice Under Section 148 treating it as a case of escaped assessment.
The present case, according to him can at best be considered as escaped
assessment for which no notice Under Section 142(1) could be issued. In such a
case, a notice Under Section 148 should have been issued which not having been
issued, the assessment is without jurisdiction.

6.2. Shri Syali then pointed out with reference to the impugned order of the
CIT (Appeals) and argued that four reasons were given not to accept the
decision in the case of Dr. Vijaykumar Datla (supra):

(1) The decision in the case of Dr. Vijaykumar Datla (supra) ignores the
provisions of Section 139(2), (2) The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of CIT v. Narsee Nagsee & Co. (40 1TR 307) was not rendered under the
provisions of the Income-tax Act but was rendered under the Business Profits
Tax Act, 1947 under which the provisions were materially different.

(3) The order of the Hyderabad Bench in the case of Dr. Vijaykumar Datla
(supra) is not a decision of the jurisdictional Bench of the Tribunal and
hence not binding;

and (4) The Assessing Officer has concurrent jurisdiction over the assessee in
the sense that he can issue notice Under Section 142(1) or a notice Under
Section 148 and if he exercises one of these two options, there is no
illegality about the same.

7\. Criticising the approach of the CIT(A) as above, Mr. Syali submitted that
in the case of Dr. Vijaykumar Datla (supra), the Hyderabad Bench did consider
Section 139(2) and that too in extenso and he drew our attention to the
relevant parts of the order. Secondly, he submitted that the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra) clearly notes
that the provisions of the Business Profits Tax Act which were before them are
in pari materia with the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922.
Thirdly, it was submitted that it was irrelevant that Dr. Vijaykumar Datla
(supra) was an order by the Hyderabad Bench which was not the jurisdictional
Bench in so far as the present case is concerned, because there is no judgment
of any High Court taking a view contrary to the view taken by the Hyderabad
Bench in Dr. Vijaykumar Datla's case. Lastly, Mr. Syali contended that the
theory of concurrent jurisdiction was rejected by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra) and further he added' that the rule is
that jurisdiction has to be expressly conferred and no inference of concurrent
jurisdiction can be drawn.

8\. Mr. Syali then referred to the order of the Delhi Bench in the case of
Sheraton International Inc. (supra) and submitted for our consideration the
following points. According to him Sheraton International Inc.(supra)
proceeded entirely on the basis of first principles without referring to the
law laid down by the courts including the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra). Therefore, the order is per
incuriam. He also invited our attention to paragraph 16 of Sheraton's order
and pointed out what according to him were certain incorrect observations made
by the Delhi Bench vis-a-vis Dr. Vijaykumar Datla's case. On merits, Mr. Syali
submitted that the interpretation of the expression "for the purpose of making
an assessment" appearing in Section 142(1), on which strong reliance had been
placed by the Delhi Bench in Sheraton International Inc.(supra)'s case, would
equally apply to a case of re-assessment since by definition in Section 2(8),
an assessment includes a reassessment. He further pointed out that Section
142(1) refers to Section 139 at two places. In the first place where the
section is referred, no sub-section is specified. In Clause (i) of Sub-section
(1) where there is again a reference to Section 139, the reference is
specifically to Sub-section (1) of Section 139. This distinction, according to
the learned counsel, is very important for this reason namely; that simply
because the assessee has not filed a return, the department is not powerless
because notice Under Section 142(1) vis-a-vis production of accounts can be
issued after issue of notice Under Section 148 also. It was in this context
that he dissected the provisions of Section 142(1) into two limbs as mentioned
earlier.

9\. Shri M.S. Syali also drew our attention to the decision of the Hon'ble
Calcutta High Court in the case of CIT v. Sultan Ali Gharami (20 ITR 432) to
contend that merely because the assessee can file a return Under Section
139(4) of the Act, it does not mean that the notice Under Section 142(1) can
be issued after the end of the assessment year. Under such circumstances, a
notice Under Section 148 was necessary. The learned counsel sought to draw
parity between the provisions of Sections 142(1) and 143(2) to contend that
just as the Assessing Officer (A.O) cannot make an assessment Under Section
143(3) after the expiry of 12 months, similarly no notice could be issued
Under Section 142(1) after the end of the assessment year. After the end of
the assessment year, only notice Under Section 148 could be issued as by that
time it becomes a case of escaped assessment. The decision in the case of
Sheraton International (supra) overlooked the two limbs of Section 142(1)
namely: (a) calling for the return and (b) calling for the details. It was
submitted that these were two different powers with different attributes
governing different situations. It was submitted that in principle, a notice
under the. section has to be issued during the assessment year which position
has been confirmed by the courts. Later on limb (a) was incorporated in
Section 139(2) which now stands substituted by the provisions of Section
142(1) and hence the question arises as to why the earlier position cannot be
implied into the new provisions.

9.1. On the basis of certain observations of the Calcutta High Court in Sultan
Ali Gharami's case (supra), Mr. Syali contended that on the expiry of the
assessment year, which in the case of Motorola was on 31.3.1998, the assessee
acquired a vested right not to be disturbed except by a procedure known to law
and that procedure has been prescribed only by Section 147 of the Act and,
therefore, once the assessment year had come to an end on 31.3.1998 and no
assessment had been made upon the assessee, the A.O. has no option but to
treat it as a case of "escaped assessment" and proceed to issue a notice Under
Section 148 of the Act. At page 448, of Sultan Ali's case (supra), the
Calcutta High Court observed that on the expiry of the assessment year,
"......... ..the assessee acquires a kind of immunity of which he can be
deprived only if certain preliminary conditions laid down in Section 34 are
fulfilled." Accordingly, the contention was that in the case of Motorola the
A.O. could not have validly issued any notice Under Section 142(1) after
31.3.1998 and ought to have issued a notice only Under Section 148 and since
no such notice was issued, the assessment made was without jurisdiction. To
the same effect is the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
State of Assam and Anr. v. D.C. Choudhuri and Anr. (76 ITR 706) which was also
cited by Mr. Syali.

9.2. In support of the contention that a period of limitation has to be
contextually inferred, reference was made by Mr. Syali to page 132 of the
treatise on Interpretation of Statutes by Francis Benion where there is a
reference to the doctrine of Ellipsis which means that a period of limitation
has to be read into the statutory provisions where it is not expressly
prescribed, considering the consequences of not reading such limitation into
the provisions.

9.3. The learned counsel also made reference to the legislative intention
while substituting Section 139(2) by Section 142(1)(i) w.e.f. 1.4.1989 which
was only to shorten the period of limitation prescribed for completion of
assessment and certain other matters. In this connection he drew our attention
to the amendment to Section 139(4) and Section 153 where the period of
limitation was shortened and submitted that in this background the legislature
could not have intended that the period Under Section 142(1) could be enlarged
as compared to the period allowed Under Section 139(4).

10\. Coming to the case of Ericsson, the following are the relevant dates:

    
    
       Date:         Remarks:
    26.8.1999    Notice Under Section 142(1) issued to the Indian company.
    9.11.1999    Notice Under Section 142(1) served on the assessee.
    24.1.2000    Return of Income filed by the assessee showing nil income.
    28.3.2000    Assessment made Under Section 143(1)
     
    
    It may be noted that all these dates fell in the financial year 1.4.1999 to 31.3.2000.
     
    
    

11\. Mr. Dastur, the learned counsel for the assessee (Ericsson) prefaced his
arguments regarding the validity of the notice Under Section 142(1) with what
he called the basic postulate, which according to him was that we should avoid
any interpretation which would result in the overlapping of the provisions of
Section 142(1) and Section 148 over the same period of time. The reason
according to him was that if this overlap is allowed, then the A.O. will be in
a position to discriminate between different assessees and may even choose to
issue notice Under Section 148 instead of 142(1), since that would give him
more time to complete the assessment. In this connection he referred to
Section 153(2) which provides for the limitation of two years from the end of
the financial year in which the notice Under Section 148 was served, to
complete the re-assessment. If such a discrimination is allowed the result in
the present case would be that if the assessment is to be completed Under
Section 143(3), it would have to be done so on or before 31.3.2000, whereas if
the assessment would have to be dome Under Section 148, it would have to be
done on or before 31.3.2002. This may also empower the A.O. to confer an
advantage on certain assesses and allow himself more time to complete the
assessment.

12\. Mr. Dastur raised one more preliminary point. He submitted that it is
agreed on ail sides including the orders of the Hyderabad and Delhi Benches of
the Tribunal (supra) that though Section 142(1) did not expressly provide for
a period of limitation for issuing the notice but such a notice has to be
issued within a reasonable time. What is the reasonable time is the question
for consideration on a proper interpretation of the relevant provisions.

13\. Two alternatives were put forth before us in connection with the
reasonable period of limitation to be read into Section 142(1) for issuing the
notice. The first alternative was that the notice should be issued on or
before 31.3.1998 i.e. within the assessment year itself (with reference to the
facts of this case where the assessment year is 1997-98). The reason is that
according to him there is an inherent indication of such a time limit in
Section 148 itself. Section 149 contemplates the issue of notice Under Section
148 at any time on or after 1.4.1998 i.e. after the end of the assessment year
but before a period of four years has elapsed. In certain cases a period of
six years has been prescribed but this makes no difference to the argument.
Therefore, a notice Under Section 148 in the present case can be issued at any
time between 1.4.1998 and 31.3.2002. It, therefore, follows that the notice
Under Section 142(1) cannot be issued after 31.3.1998 because from 1.4.1998,
it would be a case of income escaping assessment into which field a notice
Under Section 142(1) cannot intrude. In other words, if 1.4.1998 is the
starting point for the issue of notice Under Section 148 on the footing that
it is a case of escaped assessment, then 31.3.1998 is the concluding point for
the issue of notice Under Section 142(1).

14\. In support of this alternative, Mr. Dastur drew our attention to the
observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court at page 318 of Narsee Nagsee & Co.'s
case (supra) and the judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of
Harakchand Makanji & Co. v. CIT (16 ITR 119).

15\. The second alternative put forth by Mr. Dastur, which he characterized as
the narrower view, is like this. Notice Under Section 142(1) can be issued up
to one year from the end of the relevant assessment year i.e. in this case
notice can be issued only upto 31.3.1999 and not thereafter. The reason is
based on the provisions of Section 139(4). This section gives an assessee the
right to file a voluntary return up to a period of one year from the end of
the assessment year. In the present case, such a right is available to the
assessee upto 31.3.1999. As long as it is open to the assessee to file a
voluntary return Under Section 139(4), it cannot be said that the assessee has
not filed any return of income and, therefore, Explanation 2(a) to Section 147
which enables a re-assessment to be made in a case where no return of income
has been furnished by the assessee, cannot be invoked. In other words, a
notice Under Section 148 cannot be issued on the footing that the assessee has
failed to file the return, so long as the assessee still has time to file a
voluntary return Under Section 139(4). In this situation, it cannot be said
that as on 31.3.1998, the assessee had failed to file the return of income.
Therefore, the narrower view is that a notice Under Section 142(1) can be
issued only up to 31.3.1999.

15.1. The above situation, according to Mr. Dastur would also fit in with the
provisions of Section 139(5) and Section 153(1)(b). Section 139(5) gives the
assessee a right to revise the return if he has already filed a return Under
Section 139(1) or in response to notice Under Section 142(1), if he discovers
any omission or wrong statement in the earlier return and such a revised
return may be filed at any time before the expiry of one year from the end of
the relevant assessment year or before completion of the assessment, whichever
is earlier. Section 153(1)(b) also provides for a time limit of one year from
the end of the financial year in which a return or a revised return is filed
under Sub-section (4) of Section 139 or under Sub-section (5) of Section 139
respectively, for completing an assessment either Under Section 143 Section
144.

16\. Mr. G.C. Sharma, the learned counsel for the Department put forth the
following submissions with regard to the validity of the notice Under Section
142(1). The question of limitation in statutes, according to him, is of two
kinds. The first is that it places an obligation on the subject. The second
kind is the limitation which places fetters on the powers of the authorities.
The notice Under Section 142(1) is of the second kind whereas the obligation
on the assessee to file the return is of the first kind. Nothing is to be
implied in a taxing statute where it is not expressly stated, more
particularly the question of limitation. Section 142(1) does not expressly
provide for a period of limitation within which the notice thereunder ought to
be issued. The section, it should be remembered. authorizes an enquiry before
the assessment or re-assessment and there should be no limit on the power of
the A.O. to make such an enquiry. Section 142(1) and Section 148 operate in
different fields in the sense that the former gives power to the A.O. to
conduct an enquiry before making the assessment and call for a return of
income in the course of such an enquiry, whereas Section 148 is concerned with
bringing to charge the escaped income. These fields should not be permitted to
overlap and the interpretation to be placed on Section 148 or Section 147
should not be permitted to control the interpretation to be placed on Section
142(1). Under Section 142(1), the only limitation is that the notice calling
for the return cannot be issued after the assessment. Section 147 has no
impact on this aspect of Section 142(1) and it should not be permitted to
control or limit the field of operation of Section 142(1) or the power of the
A.O. to issue a notice thereunder.

17\. It was in the above background that Mr. Sharma proceeded to put forth his
analysis of Section 142(1). He emphasized that Section 142(1) commences with
the words "for the purpose of making an assessment", which, according to him
can only be read as the determination of the total income. In the
determination of the total income, it is open to the A.O., as a first step, to
compel the assessee to file a return of income where it is not filed Under
Section 139(1). He pointed out that the words "before the end of the relevant
assessment year", which were there in Section 139(2) were omitted w.e.f.
1.4.1989, on which day Section 142(1) was introduced, and to read into Section
142(1) the condition that the notice calling for return thereunder should be
issued before the end of the relevant assessment year, would be to ignore the
fact that words to that effect which were present in the omitted Section
139(2), do not find a place in the newly introduced Section 142(1). He filed
detailed written submissions which were filed by him before Delhi Bench of the
Tribunal when he argued the case of Sheraton International (supra) and
submitted that the same may be taken as his arguments vis-a-vis Section 142(1)
in the present case also.

18\. Summing up the arguments Mr. Sharma pointed out that the time available
to issue the notice Under Section 142(1), in the absence of any express time
limit prescribed in the section itself, is up to the making of an assessment.
When it was enquired of him by the Bench as to what would happen if the notice
calling for the return is issued on 31.3.2000, which is the last day for
completion of assessment for the assessment year 1997-98 Under Section
153(1)(a) and what would be the assessee's remedy in such a case, Mr. Sharma
answered that in such a case the assessment may be quashed for violation of
rules of natural justice and the assessee could be given sufficient time to
file the return of income. When it was pointed out by the Bench that under
Explanation 2(a) of Section 147, even the failure of the assessee to file a
return Under Section 142(1) is taken in, Mr. Sharma replied that the A.O. is
entitled to wait till the period allowed to the assessee to file a voluntary
return Under Section 139(4) expires, before issuing a notice Under Section
148.

18.1. In the course of his arguments Mr. Sharma also relied on the second
proviso to Section 144 of the Act which says that if a notice Under Section
142(1) calling for a return is issued to the assessee, in response to which no
return was filed, then it is not necessary for the A.O. to issue a show cause
notice under the first proviso to Section 144 calling upon the assessee to
show cause why a best judgment assessment should not be made in respect of his
income. In furtherance of this argument, Mr. Sharma contended that if the
notice issued in this case Under Section 142(1) is held to be invalid for any
reason, including the reason that it is beyond the. period of limitation, then
the assessment order passed Under Section 143(3) of the Act should be read as
an assessment made in substance Under Section 144.

19\. In reply to the above, he following arguments were put forth by Mr.
Dastur, the learned counsel for Ericsson:

(a) Section 11 of the Business Profits Tax Act corresponded to Section 22(2)
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 which later corresponded to Section 139(2)
of the I.T. Act, 1961. Section 139(2) was replaced by Section 142(1)(i) w.e.f.
1.4.1989. It is in this background that we have to approach the question.

(b) The ratio of the Hon'ble Supreme Court judgment in Narsee Nagsee &
Co.(supra) is that the A.O. cannot have a concurrent power to proceed Under
Section 11 of the Business Profits Tax Act and Section 14 of the same Act.
Therefore, the A.O. cannot have a concurrent power to act Under Section 142(1)
and Section 148 of the 1961 Act.

(c) The marginal note to Section 142 is "Inquiry before assessment". This
marginal note was appropriate before 1.4.1989 because Section 142 before that
date provided only for issue of notices by the AO calling upon the assessee to
produce the account books and other relevant information in support of the
return or on points on which the A.O. required clarification. This was the
kind of inquiry contemplated by Section 142 prior to 1.4.1989. The marginal
note, therefore, was appropriate. However, when the section underwent a change
w.e.f. 1.4.1989 whereby Clause (i) was introduced giving the AO the power to
call for a return of income and Section 139(2) was omitted w.e.f. the same
date, the marginal note was not suitably changed and it continued to be
"Inquiry before assessment". In this connection, he referred to the decision
of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhai & Co. (18
ITR 472 at 4&7) and the later judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of K.P. Varghese v. ITO (131 ITR 597 at 609). In these judgments, it has
been held that the marginal note to the section cannot override or govern the
express provisions of the section.

(d) There is no dispute that certain powers vest with the A.O. for issue of
notice Under Section 142(1), but these powers are different from the
assessee's right to file a voluntary return Under Section 139(4) within one
year from the end of the assessment year.

(e) The contention of Mr. Sharma that if the notice Under Section 142(1)
calling for a return is issued on the last day of the period of limitation for
completing the assessment thereby preventing the assessee in complying with
the same, the assessment may be set aside by the appellate authorities, is a
wholly unsatisfactory way of deciding the issue. This solution is subjective
and is not based on rational a interpretation of the provisions of the Act.
Therefore, there has to be a definite period for issuing such a notice which
in this case (Ericsson) was 31.3.1999.

20\. In the course of his reply Mr. Dastur also offered parawise comments on
the written submissions filed by Mr. Sharma on the question of Section 142(1).

21\. At this juncture, as Mr. Dastur was winding up his reply, we asked him as
to what would be the effect of the invalidity of the notice issued Under
Section 142(1) after the period of limitation, assuming the period of
limitation ends on 31.3.1998 or 31.3.1999. To this query he replied that the
assessment will have to be struck down as invalid and. without jurisdiction.
He cited the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kumar
Jagdish Ghandra Sinha (by Legal Representatives) v. CIT (220 ITR 67). He
submitted that the A.O. is entitled to make an assessment Under Section 143(3)
only (a) if a valid return of income is filed pursuant to a valid notice
issued Under Section 142(1) or (b) if the assessee files a voluntary return
Under Section 139(4).

21.1. Mr. Dastur further submitted that since the A.O. in the present case has
followed the Section 143(2) channel, it is not open to him now to change track
and say that the assessment may be treated as made Under Section 144 of the
Act (best judgment). He pointed out that this is not a case of the A.O.
quoting a wrong section of the Act. In essence and substance, the order is one
passed only Under Section 143(3), since otherwise the notice issued Under
Section 143(2) and the production of material and evidence makes no sense. The
A.O. did not purport to act Under Section 144 at all and the argument that he
only quoted the wrong section is, therefore, not available to the revenue. On
the question as to why the assessment cannot be deemed to have been made Under
Section 144, it was contended that firstly, there was no notice to make the
best judgment assessment under the first proviso to Section 144 and secondly,
in order to apply the second proviso, there should have been a valid notice
Under Section 142(1), which in this case was not there. Therefore, since the
procedure laid down in Section 144 had not been followed, there was no
question of treating the assessment as a best judgment Assessment. Mr. Dastur
also relied on the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Sultan
Ali Gharami (supra) to contend that there can be no waiver of a statutory
condition and in the present case even on facts, the assessee did not waive
the condition that a valid notice Under Section 142(1) ought to have been
issued.

22\. In his reply Mr. Syali, learned counsel for Motorola submitted that the
remedy of the assessment being set aside by the appellate authority in a case
where the notice Under Section 142(1) is issued on the last day of the period
of limitation is not an effective remedy. In his submission, the A.O. should
not in the first place be permitted at all to wait till the last day of
limitation to issue the notice, thereby compelling the assessee to approach
the appellate authorities to have the assessment set aside. Further
complications may crop up if the assessment is not set aside by the appellate
authority. He supported the argument of Mr. Dastur on this aspect of the
matter. He also relied heavily on the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in
the case of CIT v. Sultan Ali Gharami (supra), Satyanarayan Bhalotia v. CIT
(207 ITR 1030) and Burdwan Wholesale Consumers' Co-operative Society Ltd. v.
CIT (191 ITR 570). As regards the effect of the invalidity of the notice
issued by the A.O, purported to be a notice Under Section 142(1), Mr. Syali
submitted that the requirement of a valid notice is a mandatory requirement
and not merely directory, that it is not a mere error of exercising the
jurisdiction by the A.O. but of lack of jurisdiction and, therefore, it
resulted in an illegality, the consequence of which was that the assessment is
null and void. He drew our attention to the observations of the majority
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co.
(supra) where, after having held that no valid notice had been issued Under
Section 11 of the Business Profits Tax Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in terms
held that the assessment is without jurisdiction.

23\. Mr. G.C. Sharma, the learned counsel for the revenue, wished to make a
few clarifications on this issue and, therefore, we permitted him to do so. He
started by saying that each case cited by the assesses has been decided on its
peculiar facts and no general inference can be drawn. He also filed his
submissions in three parts wherein part-I were submissions in general, part-II
pertained to the principle of estoppel wherein it was contended that the
assessee cannot at the same time approbate and reprobate and part-Ill
contained the distinguishing features between the provisions of three Acts,
namely 1922 Act, the Business Profits Tax Act and the 1961 Act. Apart from the
written submissions he also contended that the assessment cannot be quashed,
even assuming that the notice issued Under Section 142(1) was beyond the
period of limitation. He pointed out that at any rate this point was not
raised by the assessee before the A.O. but was raised only before the
CIT(Appeals). The assessee, according to Mr. Sharma, led the Department to
believe that the notice as well as the return were valid, participated in the
proceedings, permitted the A.O. to make an assessment Under Section 143 and
thereby prevented the A.O. from making a best judgment assessment Under
Section 144 and by doing all this, an advantage was gained by the assessee.
Once the assessment was completed, the assessee filed an appeal and it was
only in this appeal that it took the point that the notice issued by the A.O.
is beyond the period of limitation and, therefore, the assessment was null and
void. This should not be permitted. He relied strongly on the authorities
referred to by him in part-II of his "written submissions dealing with the
principle of estoppel / approbate - reprobate. He further pointed out that the
provisions of the Business Profit Tax Act considered by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Narsee Nagsee & Co.'s case (supra) were materially different from the
provisions which are now under consideration. In this connection he drew our
attention to the fact that no time limit for issue of notice Under Section 11
of the Business Profits Tax Act was provided. According to him, Section 142(1)
of the 1961 Act is not the same as Section 139(2) of the 1961 Act or Section
22(2) of the 1922 Act. He reiterated that even assuming that the notice and
the return are invalid, the assessment must be treated as one having been made
Under Section 144.

24\. Since Mr. Sharma for the revenue had filed written submissions in three
parts in relation to the issue of notice Under Section 142(1), we thought it
appropriate to permit the assessees to offer their comments on the written
submissions and the authorities cited therein, especially because the question
of estoppel and the principle of approbate and reprobate were not raised
earlier. Accordingly we called upon Mr. Dastur to address arguments with
reference to the written submissions.

25\. Mr. Dastur submitted as follows:

(a) Section 22(2) of the 1922 Act did prescribe a time limit but it is not
relevant and nothing turns on it.

(b) Section 142(1) does not prescribe a time limit and similar was the
position Under Section 11 off the Business Profits Tax Act.

(c) Though Section 11 of the Business Profits Tax Act did not prescribe a time
limit, Section 14 of the said Act was read along with it by the Supreme Court
in Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra) case and a time limit was read into the
provisions of Section 11. Similarly, a time limit should be read into the
provisions of Section 142(1)(i), reading the same along with Section 147.

(d) It is agreed by every one concerned that a time limit, though not
expressly prescribed in Section 142(1), must be read into the provisions of
Section 142(1)(i). In fact, even in the case of Sheraton International
(supra), the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal agreed a reasonable time limit should
be read into the provisions. There are two options in this regard. The first
is that the notice should be issued before the end of the assessment year
because after that date the period of limitation for issue of notice Under
Section 148 will start. The second option is to avoid an interpretation of the
provisions which would give concurrent jurisdiction to the A.O. in the sense
that he can issue a notice either Under Section 142(1) or Under Section 148 in
respect of the same period.

(e) Without prejudice to the above Mr. Dastur contended that the period of one
year from the end of the assessment year i.e. 31.3.1999 in this case should be
considered as the period of limitation for issue of notice because Section
139(4) gives the assessee a right to file a voluntary return before that date.
Till that period expires, income cannot be said to have escaped assessment.

26\. It was contended that the provisions of Clause (i) of Section 142(1) were
different from the provisions of Clauses (ii) and (iii) of Section 142(1) in
so far as the later two clauses were procedural in nature, the breach of which
was curable, if no notice had been issued. However, so far as Clause (i) was
concerned, it was a substantial provision bestowing jurisdiction on the A.O.
to call for the return from the assessee and the breach of this provision
would render the assessment null and void. In substance, the contention was
that there could be different limitation periods in the same section for issue
of different notices. This is not strange or unknown and as an illustration
Mr. Dastur pointed out the provisions of Section 148 in this regard, where
periods like 4 years and 6 years have been prescribed for issue of notice
depending upon the circumstances.

27\. As regards the application of the principle of estoppel, it was submitted
by Mr. Dastur that there was no question of estoppel as the assessee had filed
the return of income simply in compliance with the notice issued Under Section
142(1)(i) of the Act. At the earlier stages, the assessee did not contest this
notice only because its Chartered Accountant was not aware of the legal
position. Even in the original grounds of appeal, objection to the notice was
not raised as a ground. It was raised only as an additional ground, which was
admitted by the learned CIT(Appeals) Under Section 250(5) on being satisfied
that the assessee was entitled to raise such a ground and its conduct was
bonafide. Complying with a statutory notice by filing the return,
participating in the proceedings etc. cannot be termed as misleading as was
argued by the learned counsel for the revenue and when any question goes to
the root of the matter, the assessee cannot be prevented from raising the same
at any stage of the proceedings. The principle of "approbate and reprobate"
applied to a factual situation where an assessee has taken some advantage at
one stage of the proceedings and then turns round to contest that very
situation when it appears to be disadvantageous to the assessee. There cannot
be any approbate or reprobate on legal principles but the validity of a notice
is to be examined by the revenue authorities. It is their duty to act in
accordance with law and in such a situation, there could be no "approbate and
reprobate". There may be approbate and reprobate only on questions of fact. In
support of his contention, Mr. Dastur relied on the decision of the Allahabad
High Court in Mir Iqbal Husain v. State of U.P. (52 ITR 625) where it was held
that mere filing of a return as directed by the notice does not in itself
establish that the assessee had waived his right to object to the notice. He
also cited the judgment of the Gujarat High Court in P.V. Doshi v. CIT,
Gujarat (113 ITR 22) where it was held that the jurisdictional provision which
was mandatory and enacted in public interest could never be waived and there
can be no question of waiver of such a condition by the assessee. Mr. Dastur
also made parawise comments vis-a-vis the written submissions filed by Mr.
G.C. Sharma on this question.

28\. We have given careful thought to the submissions advanced before us by
the parties. We have also examined the relevant statutory provisions of the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (Old Act) as also of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (New
Act) to which our attention was drawn. We have also considered the case law
cited before us. It is an admitted position that no time is prescribed under
Section 142(1)(i) to issue notice. However, both the Benches of the Tribunal
i.e. Hyderabad Bench in the case of Dr. Vijay Kumar Datla (supra) and Delhi
Bench in the case of Sheraton International Inc. (supra) agreed that some
reasonable time limit has to be read into the provision. Notice under the
above provision calling for a return cannot be issued any time at the whims
and fancies of the Assessing Officer. Even Delhi Bench held that some time
limit has to be read and held that notice under the above provision could be
issued till the date of the completion of the assessment. Therefore, the
proposition that notice is to be issued within a reasonable time having regard
to the scheme of the Act is not in dispute. However, there is a controversy as
to what is the inbuilt scheme of the Act, which indicates that such notice can
be issued within a particular time limit. As per the assessee, the notice is
to be issued within the assessment year or within one year of the assessment
year. The revenue on the other hand, contends that the said notice can be
issued till the time, the AO can make an assessment.

29\. In order to resolve the controversy and see the scheme of assessment, it
is necessary for us to consider the relevant provisions of the Old and New
Income-tax Act, 1961. Certain basic concepts relating to assessment of income
must be kept in view. The earning period which is chargeable to tax is called
"previous year". The "previous year" was defined in Section 2(11) of the old
Act and in Section 2(34) of the new Act. "Assessment year" means a period of
12 months commencing on 1st of April every year. It generally follows the
previous year and is defined in Section 2(9) of the New Act. The year in which
the income of the previous year is assessed and the tax is paid, is called the
"assessment year". For appreciating the scheme of "assessment", we refer to
the following comparative provisions of the two Acts i.e. old and new:

The Indian Income-tax Act. 1922. Income-tax Act, 1961.

    
    
    Section 22(1) The Income-tax Officer      Section 139(1) Every person, if his total
    Shall, on or before the 1st day of May    income or the total income of any other
    In each year, give notice, by publication person in respect of which he is assessable
    In the prescribed manner, requiring       under this Act during the previous year
    Every person whose total income during    exceeded the maximum amount which is
    The previous year exceeded the maximum    not chargeable to income-tax, shall, on or
    Amount which is not chargeable to         before the due date, furnish a return of his
    Income-tax to furnish, within such        income or the income of such other person
    Period not being less than sixty days     during the previous year in the prescribed
    As may be specified in the notice, a      form and verified in the prescribed manner
    Return, in the prescribed form and        and setting forth such other particulars as
    Verified in the prescribed manner,        may be prescribed.
    Setting forth (along with such other
    Particulars as may be required by the     Explanation - In this sub section, "due
    Notice) his total income and total world  date" means -
    Income during that year:                  (a) where the assessee is a company, the
                                              (30th day of November) of the assessment
    Provided that the Income-tax Officer      year;
    May in his discretion extend the date for (b) where the assessee is a person, other
    The delivery of the return in the case of than a company, -
    Any person or class of persons.           (i) in a case where the accounts of the
                                              Assessee are required under this Act or any
                                              Other law to be audited (or where the report
                                              Of an accountant is required to be furnished
                                              Under Section 80HHC or Section 80HHD),
                                              Or in the case of a co-operative society,
                                              The 31st day of October of the assessment
                                              Year;
                                              (ii) in a case where the total income referred
                                              to in this sub-section includes any income
                                              from business or profession, not being a case
                                              falling under Sub-clause (i), the 31st day     
                                              of August of the assessment year;
                                              (iii) in any other case, the 30th day of June of
                                              the assessment year.)
    Section 22(2)  In the case of any person  Section 139(2): (Omitted by Direct Tax
    Whose total income is, in the Income-tax  Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f.
    Officer's opinion, of such an amount as   1.4.1989.
    To render such person liable to income-
    Tax, the Income-tax Officer (may serve)
    A notice upon him requiring him to
    Furnish, within such period, not being
    Less than thirty days, as may be
    Specified in the notice, a return in the
    Prescribed form and verified in the
    Prescribed manner setting forth
    (along with such other particulars as may
    be provided for in the notice) his total
    income (and total world income) during
    the previous year:
    
    Provided that the Income-tax Officer may
    In his discretion extend the date for the
    Delivery of the return.)
    Section 22(2A): xxxxxxxxxxx               xxxxxxxxxx
    Section 22(3): If any person has not      Section 139(4): Any person who has not
    Furnished a return within the time        furnished a return within the time allowed
    Allowed by or under Sub-section (1)       to him under Sub-section (1), or within the
    Or Sub-section (2), or having             time allowed to him under Sub-section (1),
    Furnished a return under either of        or within the time allowed under a notice
    Those sub-sections, discovers any         issued under Sub-section (1) of Section 142,
    Omission or wrong statement therein,      may furnish the return for any previous year
    He may furnish a return or a revised      at anytime before the expiry of one year
    Return, as the case may be, at any        from the end of the relevant assessment year
    Time before the assessment is made.       Or before the completion of the assessment,
                                              Whichever is earlier:
                                              Provided that where the return relates to a
                                              Previous year relevant to the assessment
                                              Year commencing on the 1st day of April,
                                              1988, or any earlier assessment year, the
                                              reference to one year aforesaid shall be
                                              construed as a reference to two years from
                                              the end of the relevant assessment year.)
                                              139(5): If any person, having furnished a
                                              return under Sub-section (1), or in pursuance
                                              of a notice issued under Sub-section (1) of
                                              Section 142, discovers any omission or any
                                              wrong statement therein, he may furnish a
                                              revised return at any time before the expiry
                                              of one year from the end of the relevant
                                              assessment year or before the completion of
                                              the assessment, whichever is earlier:
                                              Provided that where the return relates to the
                                              Previous year relevant to the assessment
                                              Year commencing on the 1st day of April,
                                              1988, or any earlier assessment year, the
                                              reference to one year aforesaid shall be
                                              construed as a reference to two years from
                                              the end of the relevant assessment year).
    Section 22(4): The Income-tax Officer     Section 142(1): For the purpose of making
    May serve on any person (who has made     an assessment under this Act, the Assessing
    A return under Sub-section (1) or) upon   Officer may serve on any person who has
    Whom a notice has been served under       made a return under Section 139 (or in
    Sub-section (2) a notice requiring him,   whose case the time allowed under sub-
    On a date to be therein specified, to     section (1) of that section for furnishing the
    Produce, or cause to be produced, such    return has expired) a notice requiring him,
    Accounts or documents as the Income-      on a date to be therein specified, -
    Tax Officer may require, (or to furnish
    In writing and verified in the prescribed (i) where such person has not made a return
    Manner information in such form and       (within the time allowed under sub-section
    On such points or matters (including,     (1) of Section 139), to furnish a return of his
    With the previous approval of the         income or the income of any other person in
    Commissioner, a statement of all assets   respect of which he is assessable under this
    And liabilities not included in the       Act, in the prescribed form and verified in
    Accounts) as the Income-tax Officer       the prescribed manner and setting forth such
    May require for the purposes of           other particulars as may be prescribed; or)
    This section):
    Provided that the Income-tax Officer      (ii) to produce, or cause to be produced,
    Shall not require the production of       such accounts or documents as the
    Any accounts relating to a period         (Assessing Officer may require, or
    More than three years prior to the
    Previous year.                            (iii) to furnish in writing and verified in
                                              the prescribed manner information in
                                              such form and on such points or matters
                                              (including a statement of all assets and
                                              liabilities of the assessee, whether included
                                              in the accounts or not) as the (Assessing)
                                              Officer may require:
                                              Provided that -
                                              (a) the previous approval of the (Deputy)
                                              Commissioner shall be obtained before
                                              Requiring the assessee to furnish a statement
                                              Of all assets and liabilities not included in
                                              the accounts;
                                              (b) the (Assessing) Officer shall not require
                                              the production of any accounts relating
                                              to a period more than three years prior to
                                              the previous year.
    Section 34(1):                                  Section 147: If the Assessing
    "34(1) If in consequence of definite            Officer has reason to believe that
    information which has come into his             any income chargeable to tax has
    possession the Income-tax Officer               escaped assessment for any assess-
    discovers that income, profits or gains         ment year, he may, subject to the
    chargeable to income-tax have escaped           provisions of Sections 148 to 153,
    assessment in any year, or have been            assess or reassess such income and
    under-assessed, or have been assessed at        also any other income chargeable to
    too low a rate, or have been the subject        tax which has escaped assessment
    of excessive relief under this Act the          and which comes to his notice
    Income-tax Officer may, in any case in          subsequently in the course of the
    Which he has reason to believe that             proceedings under this section, or
    The assessee has concealed the particulars      recomputed the loss or the depri-
    Of his income or deliberately furnished         ciation allowance or any other
    Inaccurate particulars thereof, at any time     allowance, as the case may be,
    Within eight years, and in any other case       for the assessment year concerned
    At any time within four years of the end of     (hereafter in this section and in
    That year, serve on the person liable to        Sections 148 to 153 referred to as
    Pay tax on such income, profits or gains,       the relevant assessment year):
    Or, in the case of a company, on the principal
    officer thereof, a notice containing all or any Provided that where an assessment
    of the requirements which may be included       under Sub-section (3) of Section 143
    in a notice under Sub-section (2) of            or this section has been made for the
    Section 22, and may proceed to assess or        relevant assessment year, no action
    reassess such income, profits or gains and      shall be taken under this section after
    the provisions of this Act shall, so far as     the expiry of four years from the end
    may be, apply accordingly as if the notice      of the relevant assessment year,
    were a notice issued under that sub-section."   Unless any income chargeable to tax
                                                    has escaped assessment for such
                                                    assessment year by reason of the
                                                    failure on the part of the assessee to
                                                    make a return under Section 139 or
                                                    in response to a notice issued under
                                                    Sub-section (1) of Section 142 or
                                                    Section 148 or to disclose fully and
                                                    truly all material facts necessary for
                                                    his assessment, for that assessment
                                                    year.
                                              Explanation 1: Production before the
                                              Assessing Officer of account books or other
                                              Evidence from which material evidence
                                              Could with due diligence have been
                                              Discovered by the Assessing Officer will
                                              Not necessarily amount to disclosure within
                                              The meaning of the foregoing proviso.
                                              Explanation 2 - For the purposes of this
                                              Section, the following shall also be deemed
                                              To be cases where income chargeable to tax
                                              Has escaped assessment, namely:-
                                              (a) where no return of income has been
                                              furnished by the assessee although his
                                              total income or the total income of any other
                                              person in respect of which he is assessable
                                              under this Act during the previous year
                                              exceeded the maximum amount which is
                                              not chargeable to income-tax;
                                              (b) where a return of income has been
                                              furnished by the assessee but no assessment
                                              has been made and it is noticed by the
                                              Assessing Officer that the assessee has
                                              Under stated the income or has claimed
                                              Excessive loss, deduction, allowance or
                                              Relief in the return;
                                              (c) where an assessment has been made, but-
                                              (i) income chargeable to tax has been under-
                                              assessed; or
                                              (ii) such income has been assessed at too
                                              low a rate; or
                                              (iii) such income has been made the subject
                                              of excessive relief under this Act; or
                                              (iv) excessive loss or depreciation allowance
                                              or any other allowance under this Act has
                                              has been computed.)
                                              Section 148 (1): Before making the
                                              Assessment, reassessment or recomputation
                                              Under Section 147, the Assessing Officer
                                              Shall serve on the assessee a notice
                                              Requiring him to furnish within such
                                              Period, as may be specified in the
                                              Notice, a return of his income or the
                                              Income of any other person in respect
                                              Of which he is assessable under this Act
                                              During the previous year corresponding
                                              To the relevant assessment year, in the
                                              Prescribed form and verified in the
                                              Prescribed manner and setting forth such
                                              Other particulars as may be prescribed; and
                                              The provisions of this Act shall, so far as
                                              May be, apply accordingly as if such
                                              Return were a return required to be
                                              Furnished under Section 139.
                                              (2) The Assessing Officer shall, before
                                              issuing any notice under this section, record
                                              his reasons for doing so.)"
     
    
    

30\. It is evident from the above that the basic scheme relating to assessment
of income is that under the Old Act, after 1939, the ITO was required to give
a notice Under Section 22(1) by publication calling for returns in the
prescribed form from persons whose total income was assessable under the Act.
In the new Act, as per Sub-section (1) of Section 139, a statutory obligation
has been cast on the assessee to furnish a return of income. Under both the
Acts, the A.O. (I.T.O.) is authorized to issue notice to any person if in his
opinion such person is liable to tax. Such powers were vested under Section
22(2) of the old Act, corresponding to Section 139(2) of the new Act. Section
139(2) was omitted with effect from 1.4.1989 and simultaneously the same power
was incorporated in Section 142(1)(i) of the Act. A detailed reference to the
provision shall be made hereinafter.

31\. In case no assessment was made or an under-assessment was made, the
income was said to have "escaped assessment" and the ITO was authorized to
take action as provided in Section 34 of the old Act. A similar provision is
retained in Section 147/148 of the new Act. If a person having taxable income
failed to furnish a return under Sub-section (1) or Sub-section (2) of Section
22 of the old Act, he could furnish such return under Sub-section (3) of
Section 22 of the old Act. A similar right is available to the assessee and
such an enabling provision is contained in Sub-section (4) of Section 139 of
the new Act. The periods provided have been changed from time to time and the
emphasis is on wrapping up the process of the assessment as early as possible.
Likewise, other provisions relating to the powers of the ITO to make an
assessment, including best judgment assessment, have been referred to above.
At this stage it may be relevant to state that Sections 11 and 14 of the
Business Profits Tax Act were held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court to
be identical to Section 22(2) and Section 34(1) of the old Act respectively,
in the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra). Likewise Sub-sections (1), (2) and
(3) of Section 19 and Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 20 of the Assam
Agricultural Income-tax Act were held to correspond to Sub-sections (1), (2)
and (3) of Section 22 and Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 23 of the
old Act respectively. Section 30 of the same Act was held to be corresponding
to Section 34 of the old Act. This was held by their Lordships of the Supreme
Court in the case of State of Assam and Ors. v. D.C. Choudhuri and Ors.
(supra).

32\. The Hyderabad Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Dr. Vijay Kumar Datla
(supra) and learned counsel for the assessee in appeal before us placed strong
reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CIT v.
Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra). In the case of CIT v. Narsee Nagsee & Co. (1960)
40 1TR 307, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while considering a
case under the Business Profits Tax Act (BPTA), held that notice issued under
Section 11(1) of BPTA more than four years after the close of the charging
period, was bad in law as profits had escaped assessment within the meaning of
Section 14 of the aforesaid Act which was applicable to the case. Without
applying the above section, notice issued under Section 11 was held to be
beyond time and without jurisdiction. Sections 11 and 14 of the BPTA were held
to be similar to Sections 22(2) and 34(1) of the old Act. No time limit was
provided in Section 11 of BPTA also. Their Lordships (as per the majority)
made the following observations (@ page 315) relating to the scheme of
assessment:-

"As the tax under the Act is charged, levied and paid on the taxable profits
of a chargeable accounting period but assessment is in respect of the
financial year in which the Act operates it is not an unreasonable inference
that notice for the chargeable accounting period must issue in the financial
year following that period. .................... Similarly in the financial
year 1949-50 notice would have to be given in that year for the preceding
chargeable accounting period. In this view of the matter the contention that
there is no provision in Section 11(1) of the Act as to the chargeable
accounting period as there is for the previous year in Section 22(2) of the
Income-tax Act is not well-founded.

That the notion of the previous year of the accounting period is as much
applicable to the Act as to the Indian Income-tax Act is shown by reference to
Computation of Profits Rules in the Schedule to the Act. There the computation
is related to the accounting periods. The previous year is shown applicable by
reference to the rules under the Act by which some of the rules of the Income-
tax Act are made applicable to the Act; and some of the sections of that Act
are made applicable by Section 19 and by the rules under the Act.

xx xx xx xx xx The modified Section 50, as introduced into the Act by the
rules, means this that the refund, if any, can only be allowed within four
years of the financial year which commences after the expiry of the accounting
period which itself constitutes the chargeable accounting period or includes
in it the chargeable accounting period in respect of which the refund is
claimed. If the contention of the appellant is correct then this section will
be wholly otiose where the assessment is levied after say 10 years from the
end of the chargeable accounting period because by no method of calculation
will a refund of tax in that circumstance be claimable under Section 50. This
furnishes a key to when a notice under Section 11(1) has to be given. It must
be given within the Financial year which commences next after the expiry of
the accounting period or the previous year which is by itself or includes the
chargeable accounting period in question. Section 48 of the Income-tax Act, as
amended and applied to the Act, does not affect the operation of Section 50
because the two sections have to be read together and the assessee must apply
for the refund within the period specified by Section 50: Adam Baji Dawood &
Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax (1936) 4 ITR 100."

(underlining ours) 32.1. Hidayatullah J, (as His Lordship then was) did not
agree with the majority view as according to him, the provisions of the BPTA
were different from the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 and
therefore the latter Act could not be applied to the case. Yet, in respect of
the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, the learned Judge made relevant
and pertinent observations and noted the decision of the Privy Council in the
case of CIT v. Ved Nath Singh (1940) 8 ITR 222, to the following effect:- (@
page 331 of 40 ITR) "We are of opinion that Section 34 is applicable to cases
in which either no assessment at all has been made upon the person who
received the income, profits or gains liable to assessment, or, where an
assessment has been made in the course of the year, but some portion of the
income, profits or gains of such assessee for some reason or other has not
been included in the order of assessment; such income is income which has
'escaped assessment' in the year, and falls within the ambit of Section 34 of
the Act." (underlining ours) His Lordship further observed as under(r) @ page
331 of 40 ITR) "These cases arose before the amendments of 1939 and in those
days there was no provision for a general notice such as is now issued under
Section 22(1). Even in those days, the return asked for the particulars of the
total income during the previous year. Thus, at the end of the assessment year
it was not possible to issue a notice for a back period beyond the previous
year. By the force of Section 22(2) it could be said at the end of any
assessment year that in so far as the income of the corresponding previous
year was concerned, it had escaped assessment. The logical result of this was
that if no notice calling for a return under Section 22 was issued within the
assessment year, then Section 34 was the only means to get at the tax. See
Rajendranath Mukerjee v. Commissioner of Income-tax (1934) (2 ITR 71). The
scheme of the Indian Income-tax Act is entirely different, and by fixing a
time limit for the issuance of a notice under Section 22(2) makes it clear
that in Section 34 of the Indian Income-tax Act the words "escaped assessment"
ex facie covered all cases of escaped assessment whether within or without a
prior assessment. The assessment there "escapes" when once the assessment year
expires." (Underlined by us to emphasize).

32.2. In the case of State of Assam and Anr. v. D.C. Choudhuri and Anr. (1970)
76 ITR 706 (SC) (supra), the assessees had sold their tea estate in Assam on
July 9, 1953 and had submitted their returns in respect of the income from the
business of cultivation, manufacturing and sale of black tea from January 1,
1948 to July 9, 1953. On January 25, 1961 a letter was received by the
assessees from the Agricultural Income-tax Officer directing both the
assessees to furnish returns of their agricultural income for the assessment
years 1949-50 to 1953-54. Thereafter ex parte assessments were made for the
assessment years 1951-52 to 1953-54. All these assessments were challenged by
means of four writ petitions before the High Court on the main ground that no
notice under Section 30 of the relevant Act was served in respect of the
assessment years covered by the impugned orders. In the absence of a notice,
the Agricultural Income-tax Officer had no jurisdiction to make any assessment
after the expiry of three years from the end of the financial year. The
Division Bench of Assam High Court allowed all the writ petitions. About the
decision of the Hon'ble High Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have
observed as under: @ pages 708 -9 of 76 ITR) "The learned Chief Justice held
that where no return had been filed pursuant to a general notice under Section
19(1) the Agricultural Income-tax Officer was bound to proceed under Section
30 and issue a notice under Section 19(2) of the Act within the prescribed
period, namely, three years of the end of the financial year. He further held
that there was no service of notice on the respondent in respect of the
assessment years in question either under Section 19(2) or Section 30 of the
Act. S.K. Dutta J. came to the same conclusion as the learned Chief Justice
but he relied on a judgment of the Calcutta High Court in Commissioner of
Agricultural Income-tax v. Sultan Ali Gharami (20 ITR 432), in which a dissent
had been expressed from the Bombay judgment in Harakchand Makanji & Co. v.
Commissioner of Income-tax (16 ITR 119), on the question as to when
proceedings relating to assessment could be regarded as having commenced.
According to the learned judge if no return is made in response to a public
notice under Section 19(1) of the Act and no individual notice is served under
Section 19(2) there would be no pending proceedings and it would be a case of
escaped assessment. But this would be so only after the expiry of the
financial year. In other words after the publication of the notice under
Section 19(1). there would be no escapement of income till the end of the
financial year. Once the financial year is over and no return has been made in
response to a notice under Section 19(1) and no individual notice has been
served under Section 19(2) a case would arise of "escaped assessment for the
financial year". (Underlined by us to emphasize).

32.3 On appeal after considering the relevant statutory provisions, their
Lordships held that the provisions of Sections 19 & 20 of the Assam
Agricultural Income-tax Act were similar to Sections 22 & 23 of the Income-tax
Act, 1922. Particularly Sub-section (1), (2) & (3) of Section 19 of the
Agricultural Income-tax Act were held to be identical with Sub-section (1),
(2) & (3) of Section 22 of the old Act. Likewise, Sub-section (1), (2), (3) &
(4) of Section 20 of the Assam Agricultural Income-tax Act were held to
correspond with Section (1), (2) & (3) of Section 23 of the old Act. Section
30 of the Agricultural Income-tax Act was found to be corresponding to Section
34 of the old Act. Their Lordships referred to the decision in Harakchand
Makanji & Co. v. CIT, (16 ITR 119) and observed as under @ page 711 of 76 ITR
:-

"..........that once a public notice is given under Sub-section (1) of section
22 of the Income-tax Act, which is similar in terms to Section 19(1) of the
Act, the assessment proceedings should be deemed to have commenced and there
is no obligation on the Income-tax Officer to serve a notice on an assessee
individually as well. But in the same case it was said that "a notice under
Section 34 is only necessary if at the end of the assessment year no return
has been made by the assessee and the income-tax authorities wish to proceed
under Section 22(2) by serving a notice individually. It may then be stated
that as the assessment year had come to an end and as no return had been
furnished and as the authorities wished to proceed under Section 22(2) they
should not do so without a notice under Section 34."

Their Lordships finally upheld the decision of the Hon'ble Assam High court
with the following observations at page 712 of 76 ITR :-

"Keeping in view the above principles it must be held that in the absence of a
return having been filed by the assessees in the present case pursuant to a
general notice under Section 19(1) of the act assessment could be made only
after due notice under Section 19(2) or by initiating proceedings under
Section 30 of the Act. Section 19(2) requires that an individual notice is to
be served in the financial year. If no notice is served under that section
proceedings under Section 30 can be initiated by a notice in accordance with
that section within three years of the end of that financial year."

33\. The basic scheme of "assessment" under the new Act continues to be the
same. Instead of quoting large number of decisions on the proposition, we have
deemed it convenient to rely on the latest (2004) commentary of the famous
commentators Kanga, Palkhiwala and Vyas in Law & Practice of Income-tax, 9th
Edition. With reference to the provision of Section 147, the learned authors
have observed as under at page 1826:-

"Nature and basis of Assessment under this Section The proceedings taken under
this section must be deemed to relate to the original assessment proceedings
which commenced with the return filed under Section 139(1) or the issue of a
notice under Section 139(2) (now deleted) calling for return of income. If a
particular income was not included in the total income of the relevant year of
account, it can be brought to charge only by taking proceedings under this
section and by including it in the total income of any other of account."
(sic) 33.1 It can further be seen from the foregoing discussion that even when
no time limit was prescribed under Section 22(2) of the old Act, yet courts
held, having regard to the scheme of assessment, that the notice was to be
served before the end of the assessment year, otherwise income would escape
assessment at the end of the assessment year. What was implicit in the old Act
was made explicit in the new Act. The judicial interpretation was given
statutory recognition and in Section 139(2) of the new Act it was specifically
provided that the notice was to be issued "before the end of the relevant
assessment year". The provisions of Section 139(2) of new Act, prior to its
omission w.e.f. 1.4.1989, read as under:-

"(2) In the case of any person who, in the Assessing Officer's opinion, is
assessable under this Act, whether on his own total income or on the total
income of any other person during the previous year, the Assessing Officer
may, before the end of the relevant assessment year, issue a notice to him and
serve the same upon him requiring him to furnish, within thirty days from the
date of service of the notice, a return of his income or the income of such
other person during the previous year, in the prescribed form and verified in
the prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be
prescribed": (Underlined to emphasize).

33.2. If the notice was served on the assessee and no return was filed, the
proceedings could be said to be validly initiated and pending at the close of
the assessment year and could be completed within the time and manner provided
under the Income-tax Act. Such a case was not a case of "escaped assessment".
One could safely hold that till Section 139(2) remained in the new Act, there
was no change in the scheme of assessment noted above.

33.3. The new Act was amended with effect from 1st April, 1989 omitting Sub-
section (2) of Section 139 and in its place, the ITO was authorized to call
upon the assessee to furnish a return under Clause (i) of Section 142(1). The
said sub-section provides as under:-

"142(1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the Assessing
Officer may serve on any person who has made a return under Section 139 [or in
whose case the time allowed under Sub-section (1) of that section for
furnishing the return has expired] a notice requiring him, on a date to be
therein specified, -

(i) Where such person has not made a return within the time allowed under Sub-
section (1) of Section 139, to furnish a return of his income or the income of
any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this Act, in the
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such
other particulars as may be prescribed, or........."

[The words "within the time allowed under Sub-section (1) of Section 139" in
the above clause were substituted for the words "before the end of the
relevant assessment year" by the Finance Act, 1990 with effect from 1.4.1990.]
33.4. The section as inserted with effect from 1.4.1989, particularly the
words "before the end of the relevant assessment year" were not in line with
the basic scheme of the Act as it authorized the Income-tax Officer to call
for a return as per Clause (i) after the "end of the assessment year". As per
the settled law, the scheme of the Act, as noted above, was that income would
be treated as having "escaped assessment", if neither the return was filed
under Sub-section (1) nor any notice under Sub-section (2) of Section 139 was
issued before the end of the assessment year. In the cases of such escaped
assessment, the AO was required to issue notice under Section 148 of the
Income-tax Act. However, the clause as inserted also authorized the AO to call
for a return after the close of the assessment year.

33.5. The provision as inserted was found to be not workable and problematic.
Accordingly the change in the said provision was made with effect from
1.4.1990 just one year after its insertion. In the changed provision, there is
no time limit for issuing notice except that it has to be after the time
provided in Sub-section (1) of Section 139 is over. The AO cannot issue notice
and call for the return as he could do under Section 139(2) or Section 22(2)
of the old Act even before the expiry of time under Sub-section (1) of Section
139. In other words, the starting point empowering the AO to issue notice
calling for the return is specifically indicated. This is the difference.
Otherwise, the amended Section 142(i) is similar to the provisions of section
22(2) of the Old Act which have been considered in great details by the Apex
Court in the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra) as also in the case of D.C.
Choudhuri (supra). One can therefore, safely hold that a notice calling for a
return under the above clause cannot be issued after "the end of the
assessment year". The reasoning given by the Supreme Court in the above two
decisions and their interpretation of the scheme of assessment under the
Income-tax Act are fully applicable to the provisions and the situation under
consideration. No such change in the new Act has been brought to our notice
after 1st of April, 1989 which can lead us to infer that the basic scheme of
"assessment" and "escapement" of income considered by their Lordships stands
modified. As noted above Section 139(2) specifically recognized that notice
calling for a return is to be issued "before the end of the relevant
assessment year". With the deletion of Section 139(2) and amendment of Section
142(1)(i), we are relegated to the position similar to one considered by their
Lordships in above decision. Even under other Acts, where no period of
limitation was prescribed for issuing the notice calling for the return of
income, the said notice was held to be required to be issued before the end of
the assessment year having regard to similar scheme of assessment. The
authoritative pronouncements which held so are equally applicable to the
provisions of the Income-tax Act under consideration. Therefore, we are
inclined to accept the contention of the assessees that a period of limitation
to issue a notice-calling for the return under Section 142(1)(i) is inbuilt in
the scheme of the Act. As per the said scheme, the notice has to be issued
after the end of period in Section 139(1) and before the end of the relevant
assessment year.

34\. We now turn to examine Explanation 2 to Section 147 which is as under:-

Explanation 2. - For the purposes of this section, the following shall also be
deemed to be cases where income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment,
namely:-

(a) where no return of income has been furnished by the assessee although his
total income or the total income of any other person in respect of which he is
assessable under this Act during the previous year exceeded the maximum amount
which is not chargeable to income-tax;

(b) where a return of income has been furnished by the assessee but no
assessment has been made and it is noticed by the Assessing Officer that the
assessee has understated the income or has claimed excessive loss, deduction,
allowance or relief in the return;

(c) where an assessment has been made, but -

(i) income chargeable to tax has been under-assessed; or

(ii) such income has been assessed at too low a rate; or

(iii) such income has been made the subject of excessive relief under this
Act; or

(iv) excessive loss or depreciation allowance or any other allowance under
this Act has been computed."

34.1. Explanation 2 to Section 147 would not make any difference as the said
Explanation starts with the words "the following shall also be deemed to be
cases where income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment." The word "ALSO"
in the above Explanation is relevant and signifies that cases of "deemed
escaped assessment" as per Explanation 2 are in addition to the cases of
escaped assessment as per the main provisions of the section. The said
Explanation therefore, cannot control the meaning and scope of "income
escaping assessment" otherwise manifested in the scheme of the Act. The
Explanation has been added merely as an abundant precaution and to tide over
controversies arising on account of judicial decisions whether non-furnishing
of return and other illustrations could be treated as cases of "income
escaping assessment". The Explanation, therefore, does not alter the point of
time at which income is treated to have escaped assessment; that point is
always reached at the expiry of the assessment year.

35\. Reference was also made to the provisions of Section 139(4) of the new
Act which entitled the assessee to furnish a return for any previous year
before the expiry of one year from the end of the assessment year. It was thus
contended that income could not be treated to have escaped assessment before
one year from the end of the assessment year as the assessee could file the
return within the above period under Sub-section (4) of Section 139.

35.1. In our considered opinion, the aforesaid provision does not affect the
"escapement of assessment" but only confers a right upon the assessee. The
income will escape assessment if no proceedings are initiated before the end
of the assessment year. As soon as the assessment year is over and no return
is filed by the assessee nor any notice is issued to him under Sub-section
(1)(i) of Section 142 of the Income-tax Act, income would escape assessment.
In the above situation the AO is fully competent to issue notice to the
assessee under Section 148 of the Income-tax Act. He is not required to wait
for one year after the expiry of the assessment year to take action under
Section 148 of the I.T. Act However, if an assessee voluntarily files a return
within the time allowed under Sub-section (4) of Section 139 of the Income-tax
Act, then the AO cannot proceed under Section 147/148 of the Income-tax Act
against such assessee. The above logic is clearly evident from the scheme of
the Act. The purpose of issuing notice under Section 148 is to call upon the
assessee to file a return in the prescribed form and to treat such a return,
as far as possible, as a return filed under Section 139 of the Income-tax Act.
The same object is achieved if the assessee submits a return under Section
139(4). Once a return for the purposes of assessment is available, there is no
question nor is there any need to issue notice again or take action under
Section 148 read with Section 147 of the Income-tax Act. Therefore, Section
139(4) does not affect the conclusion that income escapes assessment at the
end of the assessment year if neither any notice is issued to the assessee nor
the assessee filed any return as per Sub-section (1) of Section 139 before the
end of the year. In the case of Ranchhoddas Karsondas (1959) 36 ITR 569 (SC)
as per the Head Note, it was held as under:-

"A return showing income below the taxable limit submitted voluntarily in
answer to the general notice under Section 22(1) of the Income-tax Act is a
good return; it is a return such as the assessee considers represents his true
income.

A return in answer to a general notice under Section 22(1) of the Income-tax
Act can, under Section 22(3), be filed at any time before assessment and for
this there is no limit of time.

Where in respect of any year a return has been voluntarily submitted before
assessment, the ITO cannot choose to ignore the return and any notice of
reassessment and consequent assessment under Section 34 ignoring the return is
invalid."

Here reference can also be made to the Full Bench decision of the Karnataka
High Court in the case of Kareemsons Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT ((1992) 198 ITR 543). It
provides a good illustration to explain the scheme. Their Lordships made the
following pertinent observations at page 547:-

"The decision of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid Kulu Valley Transport's
case (1970) 77 ITR 518, meets the argument of Mr. Chanderkumar that any return
filed by an assessee after the receipt of a notice under Section 148 but
beyond the date stipulated in the notice cannot be treated as a return under
Section 139. The correct approach is to examine whether the "return" satisfies
the requirements of Section 139(4); and if it satisfies the said statutory
requirements, no further argument would arise. The right given to the assessee
under Section 139(4) by the Act cannot be lost, merely because the Revenue has
instituted proceedings under Section 147, in the meanwhile. The right to file
a return, falling within Section 139(4), is as much a statutory right vested
in the assessee, as is the power vested in the Assessing Officer to net in the
escaped income for taxation under Section 147. There is no reason to read the
two provisions as in conflict with one another, or to read one provision as
overriding the other; both can stand harmoniously to arrive at the true
taxable income as demonstrated by the decision of the Supreme Court in tie
aforesaid Kulu Valley Transport's case (1970) 77 ITR 518".

The AO even under Section 139(2) had powers to curtail the period of
limitation and could issue and ask for a return of income earlier than the
time due and provided under Sub-section (1) of Section 139. (See Venkateswara
Power Rolling Mills and Anr. v. CIT 97 ITR 168 (Mys) and CIT v. New Punjab
Calcutta Transport Co. Pvt. Ltd. ( 83 ITR 844 (All.). For issuing notice under
Section 139(2) it was not necessary that the ITO should have "reasons to
believe" that income had escaped assessment or to wait till the time
statutorily allowed to the assessee under Sub-section (1) of Section 139 of
the Act is over. If he was of the view that any person in his opinion, is
assessable under the Income-tax Act, he could issue notice to that person.
Thus, the provisions of Sub-section (1) and Sub-section (2) of Section 139
could operate simultaneously.

36\. In a similar manner, the provisions of Section 139(4) and of Section 147
can operate simultaneously. After the end of the assessment year, the AO is
fully competent to issue notice under Section 148 of the Income-tax Act and
call for a return. The assessee is also entitled to file a return as per the
provisions of Section 139(4) of the Income-tax Act. Further, the provisions of
Section 139(4) suggest that notice in terms of Section 142(1)(i) has to be
issued before the time prescribed under the above sub-section. Thus, more than
one provision can operate simultaneously without in any manner affecting the
machinery/scheme of the assessment. From the mere fact that the assessee can
file a return as per the enabling provisions of Sub-section (4) of Section
139, it does not follow that no income can be said to have escaped assessment
until the period prescribed under Section 139(4) is over. The filing of the
return would halt action of the AO as explained above.

36.1. From the above discussion one may carry the impression that the
Revenue's contention that both the notices i.e. under Section 142(1)(i) and
148 can be issued simultaneously; both the provisions can operate
simultaneously and discretion is vested with the AO to utilize any one of
them. This is erroneous and cannot be accepted. Firstly, it is directly
opposed to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Narsee
Nagsee & Co. (supra). We have noted that this contention was raised and was
specifically rejected by the Supreme Court. Secondly, whereas no conditions
are prescribed for issuing notice under Section 142(1)(i) of the Income-tax
Act, the same is not true of a notice under Section 148 of the Income-tax Act.
In the latter case, the AO must have reason to believe that income has
"escaped assessment." A notice under Section 148 and "reason to believe"
relating to income escaping assessment must be based on material and not on
the fancies of the AO. The words "reason to believe" and other conditions are
specially provided to control and check the powers of the AO to issue notice
under Section 148 of the Income-tax Act. We read no such restriction under
Section 142(1)(i) of the Act. The two provisions govern different fields and
can be exercised in different circumstances. There is no similarity, as we
have noticed while considering the provisions of Section 139(1) & 139(2) or
those of Section 139(4) and 148 of the I.T. Act. Both the sub-sections here
relate to the powers of the A.O. to be exercised in different circumstances.
If income "escapes assessment", then the only way to initiate assessment
proceedings is to issue notice under Section 148 of the Income-tax Act. There
is no such requirement as far as notice under Section 142(1)(i) of the Income-
tax Act is concerned. In feet if notice has already been issued under Section
148 of the I.T. Act calling for a return from the assessee, it looks absurd to
call for a return again Under Section 142(1)(i). We therefore do not find any
force in the contention of the revenue.

37\. One more contention was taken on behalf of the assessee with reference to
the provisions of, Section 149 to support the case of the assessee. The said
section is as under:-

"149(1) - No notice under Section 148 shall be issued for the relevant
assessment year, -

(a) in a case where an assessment under Sub-section (3) of Section 143 or
Section 147 has been made for such assessment year, -

(i) if four years have elapsed from the end of the relevant assessment year,
unless the case falls under Sub-clause (ii) or Sub-clause (iii);

[Clauses (ii) & (iii) relating to cases where limitation is 7 and 10 years and
other provisions of the section not considered relevant and not reproduced].

37.1. It is clear from the section that the starting point for issue of notice
under Section 148 relating to escapement of income is to be counted from the
end of the relevant assessment year. It would only be logical to infer that
income escapes assessment at the end of the assessment year and therefore, the
period of limitation to issue notice under Section 148 is to be taken from
that point of time. Thus this section fully supports the contention that at
the end of the assessment year income would escape assessment and notice under
Section 148 will have to be issued. If that is the case, there can be no
question of calling for a return under Clause (i) of Sub-section (1) of
Section 142 after the end of the assessment year without issuing notice under
Section 148. The position in the case of escaped assessment is totally
different and the same is required to be tackled under Section 148 of the
Income-tax Act. It is therefore clear that a notice after the end of
assessment year cannot be issued under Section 142(1)(i) of Income-tax Act.
All the provisions are required to be read together and given a harmonious
construction. This is well settled law.

38\. In the case of Sheraton International Inc. v. DCIT (85 ITD 105), the
Delhi Bench of the Tribunal took a view different from one taken by the
Hyderabad Bench in the case of Dr. Vijay Kumar Datla (supra). The Bench held
that the notice Under Section 142(1)(i) can be issued at any time so long as
the A.O. has jurisdictional power to proceed with the assessment of the
assessee. In other words, it could be issued "before the time expired for
making of an assessment". The decision was also cited and relied upon by the
learned counsel for the Revenue. In reaching its conclusion, the Delhi Bench
noted that Section 142 was controlled by the words "for the purposes of making
an assessment under this Act." Therefore, for making an assessment and till
the time available for making such assessment, the A.O. could issue notice to
the assessee. The Bench also took into account the time within which return
Under Section 139(4) could be filed as in their opinion such a return was
still a return Under Section 139. For this view the Bench relied upon the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Kullu Valley Tpt. Pvt.
Ltd. (77 ITR 518). The learned counsel for the assessee contended that the
decision has been rendered without considering-in detail the reasons given by
the Hyderabad Bench in the case of Dr. Vijay Kumar Datla (supra). The Bench
further did not consider the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
of Narsee Nagsee & Co.( 40 ITR 307) and therefore reached an erroneous
conclusion. The Bench also misinterpreted the well accepted scheme of
assessment under the Income-tax Act. The detailed arguments of the parties oh
the issue have already been noted.

38.1. On a careful consideration of the rival submissions, we are of the view
that the arguments advanced for the assessees are well taken. Section 142 of
I.T. Act, prior to its amendment, had the title "Inquiry before assessment".
It started with the words "for the purpose of making an assessment". It then
did not have Clause (i) of Sub-section (1) authorising the A.O. to call for a
return from the assessee. Other clauses empowered the Assessing Officer to ask
the assessee to produce or cause to be produced accounts and documents and
give information in writing and verified in the prescribed manner. In the
present appeal, there is no quarrel that as far as powers given to the
Assessing Officer in the provisions other than Clause (i) of Sub-section (1)
of Section 142 are concerned, they can be exercised for the purpose of making
an assessment at any time before the assessment is made. The Assessing Officer
can ask the assessee to produce accounts etc. and do every thing provided in
Clauses (ii) and (iii) of Sub-section (1) up to the time of making the
assessment. But it does not follow that the A.O, for making an assessment, can
exercise any power at any time without satisfying the conditions attached to
the exercise of the power. Issue of notice calling for a return i.e. the power
which was earlier exercised Under Section 139(2) of I.T. Act for initiation of
assessment proceedings, cannot be exercised after the end of the assessment
year without recourse to Sections 147/148 of the Act. The question of making
an assessment would arise only if some proceedings have been initiated and are
pending. Only then the question of exercising the powers "for the purpose of
making an assessment" would arise. The power for initiation of proceedings as
per the scheme of the Act is very different from the power of making an
assessment. Therefore, the contention that the power of making an assessment
or reassessment can only be exercised after initiating the assessment or
reassessment proceedings is well taken. It is further rightly contended that
there is no good reason why the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Narsee Nagsee & Co. (40 ITR 307) should not be applied and why the Assessing
Officer should be held to be entitled to issue notice Under Section 142(1)(i)
where he is required to issue notice under Section 148 read with Section 147
treating it to be a case of escaped assessment. If income has escaped
assessment, the Assessing Officer has to issue notice Under Section 148 after
satisfying the conditions of Section 147 of I.T. Act recording reasons and
establishing "reasons to believe" that income had escaped assessment. These
requirements would be given a goby in case the A.O. is held to be entitled to
call for a return Under Section 142(1)(i) of the I.T. Act. Both the sections
cannot operate in the same field at the same time. Moreover, the provisions of
Section 142(1)(i), as they stood in the assessment years, with which we are
concerned, were quite similar to the provisions considered by their Lordships
in the case of Narsee Nagsee & Co. (supra). No plausible reason has been put
forward to convince us not to apply the aforesaid decision. Subject to our
aforesaid conclusions we agree with other submissions advanced on behalf of
the assessee's learned representatives without repeating here each one of
those submissions. For all the above reasons, we are inclined to hold that the
decision given in the case of Dr. Vijay Kumar Datla (supra) is correctly
decided and has to be given preference over the decision of the Delhi Bench in
the case of Sheraton International (supra).

38.2. It follows from the foregoing discussion that notice Under Section
142(1)(i) cannot be issued after the end of the relevant assessment year.

39\. In both the cases, viz., Motorola and Ericsson, the notices Under Section
142(1)(i) were issued after the end of the relevant assessment years and hence
invalid. Therefore, the assessments made pursuant thereto are invalid.

40\. This decision of ours is sufficient to dispose of the appeals in the
cases of Motorola Inc. and Ericsson and there is no need to decide the other
issues. However, since the other issues have to be decided in the case of
Nokia, and further since both the sides requested that all issues may be
adjudicated upon having regard to their importance and also to avoid
multiplicity of proceedings, we proceeded to hear arguments on all those
issues and our findings thereon are recorded in the following paragraphs.

INTEREST U/S 234A & S.234B.

41\. The second important issue relates to the levy of interest under Sections
234A and 234B, which arises in all the three cases. In support of the levy Mr.
G.C. Sharma, the learned counsel for the Revenue, strongly relied on the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Anjum M.H.
Ghaswala and Ors. (252 ITR 1) to contend that the interest under these
sections is mandatory and it has to be charged in the assessment and the CIT
(Appeals) has no powers to cancel the same. He also referred to the later
judgment of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Sant Ram Mangat Ram Jewellers (264 ITR
564) and submitted that in this judgment, the Supreme Court did not consider
it fit to re-consider the earlier judgment in Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (supra) even
in the light of the Explanation 1 to Section 234B which was introduced after
the earlier judgment. In short, the submission of Mr. Sharma was that the
interest under these sections has to be compulsorily levied.

42\. On behalf of Ericsson, Mr. Dastur submitted the following facts:

The return in the ease of Ericsson was due to be filed on or before
31.10.1997. The notice Under Section 142(1) was issued on 20.8.1999 and in
response thereto the assessee filed the return on 24.1.2000. In the assessment
order passed Under Section 143(3) of the Act, the only remark made by the A.O,
at the end of the order, so far as the levy of interest is concerned, was
"charge interest". The A.O. did not even mention the specific section under
which interest is to be charged, whether it is under Section 234A or Section
234B and so on. In the assessment form (ITNS 150), the interest Under Section
234A was shown at Rs. 16,58,15,018 and the interest Under Section 234B was
shown at Rs 22,10,88,024. This assessment form was signed by the same A.O. but
no date was mentioned. The submission of Mr. Dastur was that the mere
direction in the assessment order to charge interest without mentioning the
specific section was not sufficient to raise a demand of the interest Under
Section 156 of the Act and that a specific direction that interest is to be
charged under specific section of the Act and a further demonstration in the
assessment order itself that the conditions necessary for the levy of interest
under that section were fulfilled are mandatory requirements to justify the
levy. In this connection he formulated three or four possibilities. The first
possibility was that there is no mention at all in the assessment order about
the levy of interest. The second possibility was the one in the present case,
namely, that the assessment order contained a direction merely to charge
interest without any section being mentioned. The third possibility which is
in effect the same as the second is that the direction was to charge interest,
if any. The fourth and the last possibility was the A.O. to issue a direction
to charge interest "as per law/rules". All these possibilities were considered
in the judgment of the Patna High Court in the case of CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd.
v. CIT (222 ITR 44). In this judgment the Patna High Court equated the
assessment order to a judgment of the Court and the assessment form in
ITNS-150 to the decree. The High Court held that a decree cannot go beyond the
judgment and, therefore, no interest can be charged in the assessment form, if
there is no specific direction in the assessment order, mentioning the section
under which interest is to be charged. The rationale of this judgment,
according to Mr. Dastur, is that a vague direction, such as in the present
case, to "charge interest" will put the office of the A.O. which prepares the
ITNS-150 in a state of confusion as to the appropriate section under which the
interest is to be charged and would leave the decision to the office which
would be contrary to law. It was further pointed out by him that the judgment
of the Patna High Court has been affirmed in a civil appeal by the Supreme
Court which is reported in CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd. (247 ITR 209) as is further
clear from the judgment of the Full Bench of the Patna High Court in Smt. Tej
Kumari v. CIT (247 ITR 210) where the effect of the Supreme Court judgment has
been explained. Mr. Dastur pointed out that this is not a case of dismissal of
a S.L.P. but a case of civil appeal being dismissed on merits and on the basis
of the judgment of the Supreme Court in V.M. Salgaocar and Bros. v. CIT (243
ITR 383), the judgment of the Patna High Court got merged with the judgment of
the Supreme Court.

43\. Mr. Dastur distinguished the case of Kalyankumar Ray v. CIT (191 ITR 634
(SC)) on the ground that it is applicable only to a case where there is a
specific direction in the assessment order but the calculation thereof is left
to be made by the office in form No.ITNS-150 and there are observations to
this effect at page 637 of the report. He also pointed out that this judgment
is being erroneously invoked by the Department in cases of levy of interest
under Sections 234A etc. whereas in fact that judgment has nothing to do with
the levy of interest at all and was only concerned with the question whether
the calculation of the tax, interest, etc. should be contained in the
assessment order itself or is it enough if such calculations are shown in form
ITNS-150. He also went to the extent of mentioning that the period for which
interest is chargeable should be specified in the order because there may be
numerous situations where the office to whom the calculation is left may levy
interest for the period for which it is not leviable. So it shows that the
A.O. himself is required to apply and consider various different situations
involved in different types of cases.

44\. Mr. Dastur also distinguished the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High
Court in Vinod Khurana v. CIT (253 ITR 578) and submitted that this decision
was decided on the. basis of Kalyankumar Ray (supra) which according to him is
not applicable to a case of levy of interest under Sections 234A and 234B etc.
He submitted that the impact of the Supreme Court judgment in the case of
Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra) was not noticed properly by the Punjab & Haryana High
Court and if the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court is to be given
effect to, then it would mean that the judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra) would have to be read in a modified manner
and there would be no scope to apply that decision. As an illustration, Mr.
Dastur submitted that a vague direction given by the A.O. to "charge interest"
without mentioning the specific section would be better off than a direction
to charge interest under a specific section like Section 234A when in fact
interest Under Section 234B is also found to be leviable. The revenue in such
a situation would be without a remedy to charge interest under the latter
provision.

45\. Turning to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Anjum M.H.
Ghaswala (supra), Mr. Dastur submitted that the precise question before the
Supreme Court was not with regard to the power of the A.O. to levy interest
Under Section 234A etc. but it was with regard to the power of the Settlement
Commission to waive the interest charged under those provisions. It was in
that connection held by the Supreme Court that the interest under these
provisions was mandatory and cannot be waived by the Settlement Commission. It
was the jurisdiction/competence of the Settlement Commission which was in
question before the Supreme Court and not the modality of charging interest.
The effect of the judgment of the Supreme Court is that even the Settlement
Commission is obliged to levy interest in its order of settlement, which also
means that the specific section under which the interest is levied is to be
mentioned and it should also be shown that the conditions precedent for
levying such interest have been fulfilled. In this judgment the earlier
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra) was not
adverted to, which itself shows that the two judgments operate in different
fields. In this connection, Mr. Dastur also pointed out on the basis of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Sun Engineering Works P.
Ltd. (198 ITR 297) and certain other decisions that a judgment should not be
read out of context and a sentence or a word therefrom cannot be picked up
without having regard to the controversy, before the Court, the context etc. A
decision which is directly on the point should be followed in preference to a
decision which may have only an indirect impact on the controversy before the
Court and for this proposition reliance was placed on the judgment of the
Bombay High Court in the case of CIT v. Abbasbhoy A. Dehgamwalla (195 ITR 28).
Even assuming that there is a conflict between two judgments (of equal
strength), according to the judgment of Delhi High Court in Bhika Ram and Ors.
v. Union of India (238 ITR 113), it is the later judgment which should
prevail.

46\. To sum up, the following propositions were put forth by Mr. Dastur in
relation to the levy of interest:

(1) The calculation of tax and interest as per the directions in the
assessment order can be made in the assessment form (ITNS-150) and they need
not be shown in the assessment order, as held by the Supreme Court in the case
of Kalyankumar Ray (supra).

(2) If the assessment form (ITNS-150) contains the calculations and is also
signed by the A.O. who has passed the assessment order and also bears the same
date as the assessment order, that would amount to sufficient compliance of
the requirements laid down in Kalyankumar Ray's case (supra).

(3) The charge of interest is certainly mandatory as held by the Supreme Court
in the case of Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (supra) and it cannot be waived, provided
the conditions for the charge of interest are demonstrated to be satisfied in
the assessment order itself.

(4) To charge interest, the assessment order must specify not only that
interest is to be charged, but it should also state specifically that interest
is charged under a particular section which must be mentioned, as per the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra).

(5) In certain circumstances, it may be necessary also to indicate in the
assessment order itself the period to which the levy of interest relates and
the amount on which the interest is to be charged.

(6) All the above propositions are independent and none steps into the other,
none invalidates the other.

46.1. Mr. Dastur also invited our attention to the order of the Delhi Bench of
the Tribunal in the case of V.V. Industries v. ACIT (78 TTJ 758) in which an
unreported judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court has been cited and
followed by holding that unless there is a specific mention of the section
under which interest is charged, the levy of interest cannot be held to be
valid.

47\. Mr. Dastur also put forth his submissions on the merits of the levy of
interest Under Section 234B. This section is attracted where the advance tax
is not paid by the assessee despite there being an obligation to pay the
advance tax. The question, according to Mr. Dastur is whether there was an
obligation upon the assessee to pay advance tax in the present case. He drew
our attention to Section 209 of the Act and the steps involved in computing
the advance tax. According to Clause (d) of Sub-section(1) of Section 209, the
income-tax has to be computed on the current income of the assessee. From such
tax, the tax "deductible" at source will have to be reduced. Particular
attention was drawn to the fact that the tax need not be actually deducted at
source and it is sufficient if the tax is deductible under the various
provisions of the I.T. Act such as 195 etc. under which the payer of the
income is liable to deduct tax. In the present case, according to the assessee
the tax is deductible Under Section 195 of the Act, though according to the
payer of the income (the Indian companies), there was no liability to deduct
tax because the. amount did not represent income chargeable to tax under the
Act. However, if the view of the Revenue is accepted that the income is
taxable under the Act, tax was deductible at source from such income. In case
there is failure on the part of the payer to deduct the tax, the remedy of the
Department is to treat the payer as an assessee in default Under Section
201(1) of the Act and recover the tax from him. They could have further
charged interest from that person Under Section 201(1A) of the Act. Relying on
these provisions, the learned counsel submitted that the Revenue cannot seek
to recover the tax as well as the interest from the assessee also, which would
give them a double advantage which is not contemplated by the provisions.

48\. In support of the above submissions, reliance was placed on the following
orders of the Tribunal;

1\. Sedco Forex International Drilling Inc. v. Dy. CIT (72 ITD 415 (Del)).

2\. Asia Satellite Telecommunications v. Dy. CIT (85 ITD 478 (Del))

3\. CIT v. Rheinbraun Engineering & Wasser Gambh (R.A. No. 36/Mum/98 arising
out of ITA No. 1915/Bom/96, order dated 5th June, 1998 of Mumbai Bench 'A').

48.1. Since the assessee was not liable to pay advance tax, no interest could
be levied Under Section 234B even where there was a specific direction to that
effect in the assessment order.

49\. Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for the revenue, on the other hand,
submitted that the assessment form in ITNS-150, the demand notice as well as
the assessment order were all signed on the same day namely 28.3.2000. He
pointed out that while charging income-tax on the total income, the A.O. is
not expected to say "charge income-tax" which is actually done in form
ITNS-150. The same principle, according to him, is applicable to the case of
levy of interest in the sense that the A.O. need not give a direction in the
assessment order to charge interest. The calculation of interest is only an
administrative act which can be done by the office of the A.O. in form No.
ITNS-150. According to Mr. Sharma, if the levy of interest is mandatory as
held by the Supreme Court in the case of Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (supra), no
further application of mind is required on the part of the A.O. as contended
by the assessee. This is also supported by the use of the word "shall" in
Section 234B. As regards the contention that the mere direction to charge
interest is not valid in the absence of the mention of the specific section
under which it is charged, Mr. Sharma contended that it is implicit in such a
direction that the levy will be only in accordance with the provisions of the
Act and the relevant rules and, therefore, even such a direction constitutes a
valid levy of interest. He pointed out in this connection that Section 234B
itself fixes the liability of the assessee to pay interest as well as the
period on which interest is leviable. According to Mr. Sharma, the application
of mind on the part of the A.O. is reflected by the assessment order itself
and the view which the assessee may take regarding his liability to pay
advance tax is not relevant at all. The assessee cannot assume that no advance
tax is payable by him. The AO will charge interest on the basis of his own
findings in the assessment order regarding the quantum of assessment. He
submitted that the word "mandatory" means that it is automatic and no
discretion is left with the AO not to levy interest.

50\. Referring to the authorities, Mr. Sharma cited the judgment of the Punjab
& Haryana High Court in Vinod Khurana v. CIT (253 ITR 578) and submitted that
in this judgment both Kalyankumar Ray's judgment and Ranchi Club Ltd. judgment
(supra) have been considered and it has been held that interest is mandatorily
leviable particularly when the assessment order and the assessment form have
been signed by the same officer on the same day. Referring to the judgment in
Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (supra), Mr. Sharma submitted that it has not placed any
limitations on the powers of the AO to charge interest and in this respect, it
has the effect of over ruling all earlier decisions to the contrary. Referring
to the judgment in Kalyankumar Ray, Mr. Sharma submitted that he would go to
the extent of saying that the A.O. need not mention anything in the assessment
order about the levy of interest but still the levy could be made in the
assessment form in ITNS-150 which would be valid.

51\. In a brief clarification Mr. Dastur pointed out that the judgment of the
Punjab & Haryana High Court does not advert to the judgment - decree theory
laid down by the Patna High Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra). He
cited the judgments of the Delhi High Court in CIT v. Kishan Lal (HUF) (258
ITR 359) and CIT v. Inchcape India (P) Ltd., both of which have followed
Ranchi Club Ltd. judgment of the Supreme Court and submitted that being the
judgments of the jurisdictional High Court, they should be followed in
preference to the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court.

52\. We have carefully considered the matter. Sections 234A & 234B were
inserted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 w.e.f. 1.4.89. The
sections were amended by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1989, also
w.e.f. 1.4.89. A perusal of the circular No.549 dated 31.10.89 (182 ITR (St.)
1) shows that these sections were introduced in substitution of earlier
provisions of the Act under which discretion was given to the assessing
authority to charge or not to charge interest and also to levy penalties for
the same default. The old provisions were found to be rather complicated.
Therefore, with a view to simplifying them and also to remover the discretion
given to the assessing authority which had led to litigation and consequent
delay in realization of the dues, the amendment Act substituted the old
provisions by a simple scheme of payment of! mandatory interest for the
defaults mentioned therein. It would be better to reproduce paragraphs 10.1 &
10.2 of the circular: (Page 37 of 182 1TR (St.):

"Payment of mandatory interest to replace various interests and penalties -

10.1 The old provisions in the Income-tax Act, which gave the assessing
authorities discretionary powers to charge interest and also to levy penalties
for the same default, were found to be rather complicated. These were
contained in the following sections of the Act:-

(i) Section 139(8) relating to levy of interest for late filing or non-filing
of return of income.

(ii) Section 215 relating to levy of interest for under-payment of advance
tax.

(iii) Section 216 relating to levy of interest for deferment of instalments of
advance tax.

(iv) Section 217 relating to levy of interest for non-payment of advance tax.

(v) Section 271(1)(a) relating to levy of penalty for failure to file the
return of income or to file it in time.

(vi) Section 273 relating to levy of penalty for failure to file the
statement/estimate or for filing an untrue statement/estimate of advance tax
payable.

(vii) Section 140A(3) relating to levy of penalty for failure to pay tax on
self-assessment.

10.2 With a view to simplify the aforesaid provisions and also to remove the
discretion of the assessing authorities, which had led to litigation and
consequent delay in realization of dues, the Amending Act, 1987, has
substituted the above provisions by a simple scheme of payment of mandatory
interest for defaults mentioned therein. The provisions relating to charge of
mandatory interest are contained in the new Sections 234A, 234B and 234C
inserted by the Amending Act, 1987. The mandatory interest chargeable under
these sections are not appealable. At the time of filing the return of income,
such mandatory interest, if payable, is to be calculated on the basis of the
returned income and paid along with tax on self-assessment Under Section
140A."

The constitutional validity of the new sections was upheld in the following
judgments:

1\. Union of Home Products Ltd. v. Union of India, 215 ITR 758 (Kar.)

2\. Ranchi Club Ltd. v. CIT, 217 ITR 72 (Pat.)

3\. Sant Lal v. Union of India, 222 ITR 375 (P&H)

4\. Dr. S. Reddappa v. Union of India, 232 ITR 62 (Kar.)

5\. Nemichand Jain v. Union of India, 234 ITR 764 (MP)

53\. The levy of interest Under Section 234A, 234B & 234C has been held by the
Supreme Court in CIT v. Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (252 ITR 1), to be mandatory in
nature. The earlier provisions of the Income-tax Act were noted and the
contrast between them and the new provisions was also brought out. At page 13
of the report, it was pointed out that whereas under the earlier provisions
there was a discretion given to the authorities to either waive or reduce the
interest, under the new provisions, the intention of the legislature was to
make the collection of statutory interest, mandatory. It would be better to
reproduce the relevant portions of the judgment. It was observed at page 8 as
follows:

"For answering the above question, we will have to examine the character of
interest payable under the provisions of Sections 234A, 234B and 234C. A
perusal of these sections shows that the interest for default in the
furnishing return of income, default in payment of advance tax and interest
for deferment of advance tax are mandatory in nature." (underling ours) Again,
after referring to Sub-section (4) of Section 234A, it was observed as under:

"This section is an indicator of the fact that so far as the interest falling
due by virtue of default in furnishing a return of income, default in payment
of advance tax or interest for deferment of advance tax are concerned, Part F
of Chapter XVII has been obligated with the duty of levy of interest, as also
to make the necessary changes in the payment of interest dependent on the
change that may occur consequent to the order of settlement Under Section
245D(4)."

At page 9, the position was summed up in the following words:

"If the scheme of levy of interest is thus to be analysed on the anvil of the
provisions referred to hereinabove, it shows that the interest contemplated
Under Sections 234A, 234B and 234C is mandatory in nature and the power of
waiver or reduction having not been expressly conferred on the Commission, the
same indicates that so far as the payment of statutory interest is concerned,
the same is outside the purview of the settlement contemplated in Chapter
XIX-A of the Act."

At page 13 of the report, the Supreme Court contrasted the earlier and new
provisions relating to the levy of interest in the following words:

"Sections 234A, 234B and 234C in clear terms impose a mandate to collect
interest at the rates stipulated therein. The expression "shall" used in the
said section cannot by any stretch of imagination be construed as "may". There
are sufficient indications in the scheme of the Act to show that the
expression "shall" used in Sections 234A, 234B and 234C is used by the
Legislature deliberately and it has not left any scope for interpreting the
said expression as "may". This is clear from the fact that prior to the
Amendment brought about by the Finance Act, 1987, the Legislature in the
corresponding section pertaining to imposition of interest used the expression
"may" thereby giving a discretion to the authorities concerned to either
reduce or waive the interest. The change brought about by the Amending Act
(Finance Act, 1987) is a clear indication of the fact that the intention of
the Legislature was to make the collection of statutory interest mandatory."
(underlining ours) The above observations of the Supreme Court clearly lay
down that the levy of interest Under Sections 234A, 234B & 234C is mandatory
in the sense that it cannot be waived or reduced by the income-tax
authorities. The AO, after the amendment and the introduction of the new
sections, does not have any discretion to waive or reduce the interest
chargeable under the new provisions.

54\. The argument advanced on behalf of the assessee with reference to the
judgment in the case of Ghaswala (supra) was that the judgment was not
concerned with the modalities of the levy of interest and in fact the judgment
was about non levy or waiver of the interest by the Settlement Commission. It
was argued that the question before the Supreme Court was only whether Section
245D(6), which provides for terms of settlement of tax, penalty or interest
empowers the Settlement Commission in any manner to waive or reduce the
interest payable Under Sections 234A, 234B & 234C. It was submitted that the
effect of the judgment is that even the Settlement Commission has to levy
interest in its order which implies that the Commission is not absolved from
the duty of mentioning the specific section under which the interest is
charged and of disclosing in the order as to how it was satisfied that the
levy was attracted. It was further argued that the meaning of the interest
being "mandatory" is not that the authority levying the same-was relieved of
the obligation to specify the particular section under which it is charged.

55\. Mr. Dastur, Ld.Counsel for the assessee agreed that the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of Ghaswala (supra) was rendered by a five judges
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court, whereas the earlier judgment of the
Supreme Court in CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd. (247 ITR 209) was rendered by a three
judges Bench of the Supreme Court and also that the judgment in Ghaswala
(supra) was rendered on 18.10.2001, which is later than the judgment in Ranchi
Club Ltd. which was rendered on 1.11.2000, but would submit that the issue in
Ghaswala's case (supra) is not the same as in Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra). He
would further say that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ranchi Club Ltd.
is a direct judgment on the question before us, which cannot be modified or
understood in the light of a judgment which only touches the issue before us
indirectly. This contention, according to him would also equally apply vis-a-
vis the earlier judgment of the three judges Bench of the Supreme Court in the
case of Kalyankumar Ray v. CIT (191 ITR 634).

56\. It is, no doubt, true that in CIT v. Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (supra), the
Supreme Court was concerned only with the question whether Under Section
245D(6), the Settlement Commission has the power to waive or reduce the
interest payable Under Sections 234A to 234C. Superficially, therefore, it is
possible to say that the question as to whether, in the absence of mention of
the specific section under which the interest is charged, the charge would be
valid, did not arise in that case. However, a closer examination of the
judgment shows that while answering the question, the Supreme Court did
consider it necessary to examine the character of interest payable under the
above sections. It was the view of the Supreme Court that the interest
chargeable under these sections is mandatory in nature. This has been held in
more than one place in the judgment (as shown earlier). Since the interest was
held to be mandatory in nature and the power of waiver or reduction not having
been expressly conferred on the Settlement Commission, it was held that the
Settlement Commission could not waive or reduce the interest. Therefore, the
ratio of the judgment is that the interest chargeable under these provisions
is mandatory in nature. If the interest is mandatory in nature, it follows
that if there is such a default as would attract the provisions of Sections
234A to 234C, then the assessee becomes automatically liable to pay the
interest. The assessing authority has no power to waive or reduce the same, a
power which he enjoyed before the introduction of the new provision and which
has been taken away from him w.e.f. 1.4.89. Once the default is established,
the liability to pay interest fastens itself upon the assessee, without
anything more. The default, once established, may be likened to a lighted
match stick to a trail of gun powder.

57\. The question that would next arise is whether, where the interest is
mandatory, there should be mention in the assessment order of the specific
section under which it has been charged. In the cases before us, it is common
ground that in none of the assessment orders has the assessing officer
mentioned the specific section under which the interest has been charged. In
the case of Ericsson, the AO has merely stated "charge interest". The same is
the position in the case of Motorola. In the case of Nokia, the AO has stated
in the assessment order "charge interest as per rule". However, in all the
cases, the section under which the interest has been charged is seen mentioned
in the assessment form, which is form No. ITNS 150, copies of which have been
filed before us. In these forms, it is seen that the specific sections as well
as the amounts of the interest charged have been mentioned. In the case of
Kalyankumar Ray (supra), the question was whether the assessment form No. ITNS
150 can be treated as part of the assessment order. The question arose before
the Supreme Court this way. In that case, the assessment order (where the
total income was computed) itself did not contain the calculations of the
income-tax. These calculations were made in form No. ITNS 150. The contention
advanced before the Supreme Court was that Section 143(3) mandates that there
should be an order in writing determining the sum payable by the assessee on
the basis of the assessment and since the assessment order proper did not in
itself contain the calculations or the determination of the tax payable by the
assessee, the entire assessment order should be held to be void and annulled.
The contention of the department, based on the punctuation in Section 143(3)
was that an order in writing was required only for the assessment of the
income or loss and no such order in writing is required for determining the
tax payable by the assessee which is an independent process. This argument,
though found plausible, was rejected by the Supreme Court by saying that even
the determination of the tax in writing is a necessary requirement for the
purpose of an assessment. The Supreme Court however, proceeded to hold that
the Act does not require that both the computation of the total income as well
as the tax should be done on the same sheet of paper which is superscribed as
"assessment order". It held that the calculation of the tax payable is a
process which is mainly arithmetical and, therefore, it could be done by the
office of the ITO under his direction and once the office makes the
calculation which the ITO approves, it cannot be argued that there was no
order in writing showing the tax payable by the assessee. It was however, made
clear that only when the computation sheet is signed or initialled by the ITO
that the assessment process gets completed The Supreme Court took note of the
practice, prevailing in the Income-tax Deptt., of the staff preparing form No.
ITNS 150 showing the calculations under the necessary columns and also showing
the net amount payable by the assessee. It noticed that this form' is
generally checked and signed or initialed by the ITO and is followed by a
demand notice. It was finally held that the assessment form or form No. ITNS
150 "is also a form for determination of tax payable. When it is signed or
initialed by the ITO, it is certainly an order in writing by the ITO,
determining the tax payable, within the meaning of Section 143(3)". It was
further observed that there is no reason "why this document, which is also in
writing and which has received the imprimatur of the ITO should not be treated
as part of the assessment order in the wider sense in which the expression has
to be understood in the context of Section 143(3)". What was required, in the
words of the Supreme Court "is that there must be some writing initialed or
signed by the ITO before the period of limitation, prescribed for completion
of the assessment has expired in which the tax payable is determined and not
that the form usually styled as the "assessment order" should itself contain
the computation of tax as well". These observations clearly show that the
calculation part of the tax payable need not be done in the assessment order
itself, but can be done separately in form No. ITNS 150 subject to the
condition that the said form is signed or initialed by the ITO to indicate
that the calculations have his approval. If Form No. ITNS 150 is to be treated
as part of the assessment order, it follows that if the specific section under
which interest is charged is mentioned in that form, it satisfies the
requirement that the interest must be charged in the assessment order itself
and should specify the section also.

58\. The argument before us on behalf of the assessees however, was that the
above judgment of the Supreme Court is not a direct decision on the question
whether a specific order by the AO, mentioning the section under which the
interest is charged, is required for the validity of the levy. It was pointed
out that the question before the Supreme Court was not about the validity of
the charge of interest, but whether the calculations of the tax have to be
made in the assessment order itself and, therefore, the principle laid down in
the judgment cannot be extended to cover everything in the assessment form. In
addition, it was also argued that the judgment was rendered in disposing of a
Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of the Constitution of India and,
therefore, though it gives elaborate reasons supporting the decision,
nevertheless it cannot be equated to a judgment rendered (while disposing of a
Civil Appeal to the Supreme Court which is the case in CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd.
(supra). It is, therefore, contended that even if the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Kalyankumar Ray's case is considered to be relevant to the present
controversy, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra),
being a judgment rendered in a Civil Appeal and in which the question directly
arose, should be preferred.

59\. Before we proceed to consider the above argument, it is necessary for us
to refer to Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra). This judgment was rendered by a three
judge Bench of the Supreme Court in a Civil Appeal. The appeal arose from the
judgment of the Ranchi Bench of the Patna High Court in the case of Ranchi
Club Ltd. v. CIT, 217 ITR 72, in which the High Court had held that Sections
234A & 234B are constitutionally valid, that they are not penal in nature and
that the interest charged under these provisions is compensatory in character.
This judgment was affirmed, by the Supreme Court. By the same judgment, the
Supreme Court also affirmed another judgment of the Ranchi Bench of the Patna
High Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd. v. CIT, 222 ITR 44. In this case
before the High Court, the contention advanced on behalf of the assessee
against the levy of interest Under Sections 234A to 234C was that the interest
cannot be levied merely through a notice of demand Under Section 156 of the
Act where there was no specific direction in the assessment order that
interest was leviable and further that the mere insertion of the words in the
assessment order "charge interest, if any" or "charge interest as per rules"
was not sufficient for charging interest through the notice of demand. These
contentions were dealt with by the High Court (222 ITR 44) and were found in
favour of the assessee. It would be better to reproduce the relevant portion
of the judgment: (@ page 50 of the report) "So far as the issues (iii) and
(iv) raised by Mr. Moitra are concerned, we see no difficulty in setting aside
the notices of demand claiming interest under any of these Section 234A, 234B
or 234C.

Section 156 of the Act is as under:

"156. Notice of demand - When any tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other
sum is payable in consequence of any order passed under this Act, the
Assessing Officer shall serve upon the assessee a notice of demand in the
prescribed form specifying the sum so payable."

From the bare reading of Section 156 it is clear that notice of demand
claiming interest can be issued only when there is order in the assessment
order levying interest. Except in the cases of the assessee Tej Kumari Devi
[(C.W.J.C.No. 2732 of 1995 ® and C.W.J.C. No. 2780 of 1995 ®] there is no
order in any of the assessment orders levying interest under any of the
Sections 234A, 234B or 234C. To use the expression "charge interest, if any"
or "charge interest as per rules" cannot be read to mean that the Assessing
Officer has passed orders "charge interest under all the aforesaid sections".
The order to charge interest has to be specific and clear, as for that matter
any order to charge any tax, penalty or fine. It is different thing as in the
case of Tej Kumari Devi where there is an order levying interest but it left
the calculation to the office. The assessee must be made to know that the
Assessing Officer after applying his mind has ordered the charging of interest
and under which of the sections of the Act. Interest is payable under various
provisions like for default or delay in furnishing the return of income
(Sections 139(8) and 139(9) and also under the various sections for default in
payment of advance tax (Sections 215, 216, 217, 234B and 234C). A notice of
demand is somewhat like a decree in a civil suit which must follow the order.
When a judgment does not specify any amount to be charged under any particular
section, the decree cannot contain any such amount. Similarly when the
assessment order is silent if any interest is leviable, the notice of demand
under Section 156 of the Act cannot go beyond the assessment order and the
assessee cannot be served with any such notice demanding interest. We,
therefore, do not feel any difficulty in coming to the conclusion that the
notices of demand in CW.J.C.Nos. 3609 of 1995®, 3287 of 1995®, 3562 of 1995®,
3494® of 1995 and 3527 of 1995®, have to be quashed so far these relate to
charging of interest under Section 234A, 234B or 234C of the Act. We get
support for the view which we have taken from the decisions of the Calcutta
High Court in Monohar Gidwany v. CIT (1983) 139 ITR 498 and CIT v. Williard
India Ltd. (1993) 202 ITR 423 and that of the Gauhati High Court in CIT v.
Namdang Tea Co. India Ltd. (1993) 202 ITR 414."

60\. The above judgment was also taken up to the Supreme Court by the
department and was disposed of by the Supreme Court by the same judgment
reported in 247 ITR 209 which we have already referred to. The judgment of the
Supreme Court is as under:

"We have heard learned counsel for the appellant. We find no merit in the
appeals.

The civil appeals are dismissed. No order as to costs."

61\. Relying on the above judgment of the Supreme Court, it is contended
before us that this judgment directly answers the question that has arisen
before us and since it has been rendered in a Civil Appeal, and not merely in
a Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, it
ought to be followed and it must be held that where the specific section under
which the interest is charged is not mentioned in the assessment order, the
levy itself is invalid. It is contended that to validly levy interest, the
assessment order must specify not only that interest is charged, but also
under which section it has been charged.

62\. With respect, we are unable to give effect to the argument that the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyankumar Ray (supra) is not
applicable to the question before us and that the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra) is to be applied. We may first
refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd.
(supra). No doubt, it has been rendered in a Civil Appeal. However, the
earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyankumar Ray (supra),
rendered by a Bench of equal strength, does not appear to have been brought to
the notice of the Supreme Court in Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra). The judgment in
Kalyankumar Ray's case does not appear to have been brought to the notice of
the Ranchi Bench of the Patna High Court also whose judgment was upheld in
appeal by the Supreme Court. The ratio on the basis of which the judgment in
Kalyankumar Ray's case was rendered, in our humble understanding is that form
No. ITNS 150, if it has been signed or initialed by the same AO, has to be
read as part of the assessment order Under Section 143(3). In the present
cases, the forms have been signed by the same AO, who signed the assessment
order. Therefore, these forms also have to be read as part of the assessment
orders in the present cases. We have already adverted to the fact that in
these forms, the specific section under which the interest has been charged,
as also the amounts of the interest charged under these sections have been
separately shown. There is no dispute about the same. If these forms are to be
read as part of the assessment orders in the present cases, then there can be
no room for the complaint that the AO did not specify the section under which
the interest has been charged. Secondly, the observations of the Patna High
Court extracted earlier show that the High Court has relied on the judgments
of the Calcutta and Gauhati High Courts. These judgments are -

(a) Monohar Gidwany v. CIT, 139 ITR 498 (Cal.)

(b) CIT v. Williard India Ltd., 202 ITR 423 (Cal.)

(c) CIT v. Namdang Tea Co. India Ltd., 202 ITR 414 (Gauhati) A perusal of
these judgments shows that they were all rendered under the old provisions of
the Income-tax Act relating to the levy of interest. In the Calcutta case of
Monohar Gidwany v. CIT (supra), the contention was that the interest Under
Section 139(8) for delayed submission of the return and that Under Section 217
for failure to file an estimate of advance tax must be levied in the
assessment order itself and not merely in the demand notice. This contention
was accepted by the Calcutta High Court and it was held that unless the order
of assessment itself incorporates an order for the payment of interest, the
assessee cannot be asked, by means of a simple demand notice, to pay the penal
interest Under Sections 139 and 217 of the Act. In the light of the judgment
of the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyankumar Ray (supra), form No. ITNS 150
is also to be considered as part of the assessment order and if this form
shows that the interest is levied and the specific section under which it is
levied is also shown, then it is as if the levy of interest is made in the
assessment order itself. A perusal of the judgment of the Calcutta High Court
in the case of CIT v. Williard India Ltd. (supra) shows that the AO did not
give any reasons in the assessment order for charging the interest, but while
computing the income, levied interest without mentioning the details of the
calculations in the assessment order. The Tribunal deleted the interest
charged on the ground that no speaking order was passed. The Tribunal's order
was upheld by the Calcutta High Court. In CIT v. Namdang Tea Co. India
Ltd.(supra), the Gauhati High Court held that the levy of interest Under
Section 216 was not mandatory, but was discretionary and if there was under-
estimation of advance tax on account of bona fide reasons, they shall be taken
into account by the AO and he could refrain from charging interest if he is
satisfied as to the bona fide of the reasons. The AO was found to have charged
interest on the assumption that the interest was mandatory. This assumption
was held by the High Court to be erroneous. Thus, the first judgment of the
Calcutta High Court cited above proceeded on the basis that the levy of
interest has to be in the assessment order itself, whereas the second judgment
of the same High Court cited above laid down that a speaking order has to be
passed for levying interest Under Section 216. In that case even the details
of the calculations were not mentioned in the assessment order. In the case
before the Gauhati High Court, it was held that the levy of interest Under
Section 216 was discretionary and not mandatory. It is to be noted that both
the Calcutta judgments were rendered before the judgment in the case of
Kalyankumar Ray (supra)(SC).

63\. The character of the levy of interest has been held by the Supreme Court
to be mandatory in nature. Once, it is held to be mandatory in nature and the
discretion of the AO having been expressly taken away Under Sections 234A to
234C of the Act, it can no longer be stated that merely because the assessment
order does not mention the section under which the interest is charged, the
levy itself is invalid. The liability to pay interest arises on the default
being committed and thereafter any reference to the specific section of the
Income-tax Act under which the interest is charged is only a matter of
procedure. The omission of the AO to either state that interest is leviable or
to mention the specific section under which it is levied does not control or
affect in any manner, the liability of the assessee to pay the interest, given
the default has been committed. The requirement that the AO should mention the
specific section under which the interest has been charged, canvassed before
us on behalf of the assessees, can govern only to the limited extent of
touching upon the rules of natural justice which have to be complied with
while completing the assessment. If the AO does not give reasons for the levy
of interest, the assessee may not get an opportunity to show cause why in his
case the interest cannot be levied at all. Once the interest is held to be
mandatory in nature, as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Anjum
Ghaswala (supra), there is only a limited area which is open to judicial
scrutiny. The question which can be examined is only whether the assessee has
committed any such default as would attract the levy under any of these
sections. Once the default is established, the liability cannot be wished away
nor it can it be wiped out on the ground that the AO has not mentioned the
specific section under which it is charged. The only genuine grievance which
an assessee can have is that if the AO had indicated his mind to levy interest
under any of these sections and had specifically drawn the; assessee's
attention to a particular section authorizing the levy of interest, he would
have had an opportunity of showing that no such default has been committed as
would attract the levy. Only for this limited purpose, it can be said that it
is desirable that the AO indicates the specific section under which the
interest is charged. In other words, the appellate authorities can only
examine whether there has been a default or not. If there is a default and the
same is established to have been committed, the interest cannot be cancelled.
On the other hand, if the assessee succeeds in establishing that there is no
default, the levy of interest must be struck down. The rights of the assessee
are certainly prejudiced if he is not told as to why he has to pay interest.
That prejudice can be removed if the assessment order contains a mention of
the specific section so that the assessee can know what precisely is the
default allegedly committed by him according to the income-tax authorities and
he can thereafter take steps to show that no such default has been committed.
But to say that the levy must be struck down as invalid merely because the
assessment order does not mention the section under which it is charged
appears to us to go contrary to the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in
Ghaswala's case (supra) that the character of the interest Under Sections 234A
to 234C is mandatory in nature. In the present cases, the assessees' complaint
that the specific section under which the interest is charged has not been
mentioned is without force, having regard to the fact that the specific
section has been mentioned in form No. ITNS 150 in all the three cases before
us and having regard to the legal position laid down by the Supreme Court in
Kalyankumar Ray's case (supra) to the effect that form No. ITNS-150 forms part
of the assessment order Under Section 143(3).

64\. It was pointed out on behalf of the assessees more than once before us
that the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra)
should be followed in preference to the judgment in the case of Anjum Ghaswala
(supra) because the former judgment is a direct judgment on the issue before
us. It was also pointed out that the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Kalyankumar Ray's case (supra) was rendered while dismissing a Special Leave
Petition under Article 136, though with reasons, but nevertheless it cannot be
preferred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ranchi Club Ltd.
(supra), because the latter is a judgment rendered in a Civil Appeal. It was
also submitted that the judgment of the Patna High Court in Ranchi Club Ltd.
v. CIT, (222 ITR 44) (supra) having been upheld by the Supreme Court, has
merged with the judgment of the Supreme Court and thus ought to be preferred
over the other two judgments of the Supreme Court. With respect, we find it
difficult to give effect to the submission. As already pointed out, the
Supreme Court for the first time held in Anjum Ghaswala's case (supra) that
the interest chargeable Under Sections 234A to 234C is mandatory in nature.
The character of the interest chargeable under these provisions was not the
subject matter of adjudication before the Supreme Court in the case of Ranchi
Club Ltd. (supra) or before the Patna High Court, whose judgment was affirmed
by the Supreme Court. The question before the Patna High Court was only
whether in the absence of a specific direction in the assessment order levying
interest, the levy can be upheld. A perusal of the judgment shows that no
arguments on the basic question regarding the nature of the levy were
addressed. With respect, the High Court's attention does not also appear to
have been drawn to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Kalyankumar Ray (supra), so also before the Supreme Court in CIT v. Ranchi
Club Ltd. (supra) in which the Supreme Court upheld the judgment of the Patna
High Court. We have also referred to the Full Bench judgment of the Ranchi
Bench of the Patna High Court in Smt. Tejkumari and Ors. v. CIT and Ors., (247
ITR 210) a judgment rendered on 22nd Sept., 2000, after the judgment of the
Supreme Court in CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra) rendered on 1st August, 2000.
The question referred to the Full Bench for consideration was firstly whether
the interest Under Sections 234A & 234B read with Explanation 4 is liable to
be charged on the returned income or assessed income. Another question which
was referred for consideration by the Full Bench was whether in the absence of
a specific order of the assessing authority, interest could be charged and
recovered from the assessee. The final decision of the Full Bench is as under:
(@ page 218) "(i) The decision rendered by the Division Bench in Ranchi Club
Ltd.'s case (1996) 217 ITR 72 (Patna) and having been affirmed by the Supreme
Court in Civil Appeal No. 10360 of 1996 (see 2001) 247 ITR 209), has correctly
decided the issues which are the subject matter of this reference.

(ii) Interest under Sections 234A and 234B is leviable on the tax on the total
income as declared in the return and not on the income as assessed and
determined by the assessing authority.

(iii) In the absence of any specific order of the assessing authority interest
could not be charged and recovered from the assessee."

Here again, the character of the interest was not under consideration by the
Full Bench. As we have already pointed out, it was only in the case of Anjum
Ghaswala (supra) that for the first time, the Supreme Court examined the
character of the levy and held that it is mandatory in nature. This judgment,
in our opinion, gives rise to an entirely different complexion to various
aspects of the levy of interest, emanating from, the fundamental principle
that the levy is mandatory. We have earlier outlined the consequences which
would arise, if a particular levy is held to be mandatory. All that can be
complained against the levy which is mandatory is that the default that
attracts the levy has not been committed. It is only for this limited purpose
that the correctness of the levy can be examined by appellate authorities. It
would be open to the aggrieved party before them to show whether the default
has occurred or not. The position in such cases has been summed up by the
Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Hari Ram Yadav and Ors. (AIR
1994 (SC) 1262) a judgment of a three judge Bench of the Supreme Court. Under
the relevant service rul es, the Governor of the State had the power to
suspend an employee' of the State Govt. against whom disciplinary proceedings
were pending or were being contemplated. The Rule 3(1) which provided for the
suspension stated that the Governor of the State should be "satisfied" that it
is necessary or desirable to place the employee Under "suspension. The
suspended employee challenged the order of suspension and contended that the
suspension order was passed without satisfying the requirement of the rule
which required the State Govt. to be "satisfied". The Tribunal accepted the
contention and held that the suspension order was passed without satisfying
the requirement of the Rule because the order nowhere stated that the Governor
was satisfied that it was either necessary or desirable to place the employee
under suspension. The Supreme Court observed that the Tribunal had quashed the
suspension order on the only ground that it did not contain a recital to the
effect that the Governor of Haryana was satisfied that it was necessary or
desirable to place the employee under suspension. Thereafter, the Supreme
Court proceeded to hold as under:

"We find it difficult to agree with the said view of the Tribunal. The mere
fact that the impugned order of suspension does not contain a recital that the
Governor was satisfied that it is either necessary or desirable to place
respondent No. 1 under suspension does not, in our opinion, render the said
order invalid. The law is well settled that in cases where the exercise of
statutory power is subject to the fulfillment "of a condition then the recital
about the said condition having been fulfilled in the order raises a
presumption about the fulfillment of the said condition, and the burden is on
the person who challenges the validity of the order to show that the said
condition was not fulfilled. In a case, where the order does not contain a
recital about the condition being fulfilled, the burden to prove that the
condition was fulfilled would be on the authority passing the order if the
validity of the order is challenged on the ground that the said condition is
not fulfilled. Reference, in this context, may be made to the decision of this
Court in Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P. (1962) 1 SCR 422:
(AIR 1961 SC 1381) where it has been observed:

"The validity of the order therefore does not depend upon the recital of the
formation of the opinion in the order but upon the actual formation of the
opinion and the making of the order in consequence. It would therefore follow
that if by inadvertence or otherwise the recital of the formation of the
opinion is not mentioned in the preamble to the order the defect can be
remedied by showing by other evidence in proceedings where challenge is made
to the validity of the order, that in fact the order was made after such
opinion had been formed and was thus a valid exercise of the power conferred
by the law. The only exception to this course would be where the statute
requires that there should be a recital in the order itself before it can be
validly made." (p.432 of SCR) : (at p. 1386 of AIR):

"We cannot accept the extreme argument of Shri Aggarwala that the mere fact
that the order has been passed is sufficient to raise the presumption that
conditions precedent have been satisfied, even though there is no recital in
the order to that effect. Such a presumption in our opinion can only be raised
when there is a recital in the order to that effect. In the absence of such
recital if the order is challenged on the ground that in fact there was no
satisfaction, the authority passing the order will have to satisfy the Court
by other means that the conditions precedent were satisfied before the order
was passed. We are equally not impressed by Shri Pathak's argument that if the
recital is not there, the public or Courts and Tribunals will not know that
the order was validly passed and therefore it is necessary that there must be
recital on the face of the order in such a case before it can be held to be
legal. The presumption as to the regularity of public acts would apply in such
a case; but as soon as the order is challenged and it is said that it was
passed without the conditions' precedent being satisfied the burden would be
on the authority to satisfy by other means (in the absence of recital in the
order itself) that the conditions precedent had been complied with." (p.434 of
SCR): (at p. 1387 of AIR)."

Drawing analogy from this judgment, we can say that where the section under
which the interest is charged is not mentioned or where no reasons are given
for the levy, all that can be done, when the levy is challenged is to call
upon the AO to support the levy with reasons and show the default committed by
the assessee, so that the assessee gets an opportunity to contest the levy.
But the levy itself cannot be struck down as invalid.

65\. The contention that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kalyankumar
Ray's case was rendered while dismissing a Special Leave Petition under
Article 136 of the Constitution and not in a Civil Appeal as in the case of
Ranchi Club Ltd. and, therefore, it is not a binding judgment under Article
141 of the Constitution of India is, with respect, not acceptable. In Daryao
v. State of UP (AIR 1961 (SC) 1457), it was held that if the SLP is dismissed
in limine without passing a speaking order then such dismissal cannot be
treated as creating a bar of res judicata. It was further held that in the
absence of a speaking order, it would not be easy to decide all the factors
which weighed in the mind of the Court and that makes it difficult and unsafe
to hold that such a summary dismissal is a dismissal on merits. These
observations themselves suggest that if an SLP is dismissed by giving reasons
and by passing a speaking order then it would create a bar of res judicata. We
may notice a few judgments in this regard. In Union of India v. All India
Services Pensioners' Association and Anr. (AIR (1988) (SC) 501), the Central
Administrative Tribunal did not apply an order of the Supreme Court passed in
an SLP on the ground that the order was not passed while dismissing an appeal.
Disapproving the decision of the CAT, a Division Bench of the Supreme Court
held as under:

"With great respect to the Tribunal, it should be stated that the way in which
it has tried to ignore the decision of this Court in the Andhra Pradesh State
Govt. Pensioners" Association's case (AIR 1986 (SC) 1907)(supra) is not
correct................The first ground relied on by the Tribunal not to
follow the said decision is that it had been rendered by this Court while
dismissing the same SLPs. This is a wholly untenable ground. The SLPs were not
dismissed without reasons. This Court had given reasons for dismissing the
SLPs. When such reasons are given, the decision becomes one which attracts
Article 141 of the Constitution which provides that the law declared by the
Supreme Court shall be binding on all the Courts within the territory of
India" (underlining ours).

This judgment of the Supreme Court was applied by the Bombay High Court in the
case of Miss Kamla Khushaldas Tekchandani v. O.D. Mohindra and Ors. (240 ITR
796). In the case of Appellate Authority, Govt. of India v. Naresh M. Mehta
(200 ITR 773), a Division Bench of the Madras High Court noted that the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Tanvi Trading & Credits P. Ltd. (191 ITR
307), though rendered under Article 136 of the Constitution of India in an
SLP, specifically held that "the High Court was right in its conclusion" and,
therefore, it means that the judgment of the High Court has been affirmed by
the Supreme Court and thus the judgment of the Supreme Court, though rendered
under Article 136 of the Constitution, would amount to a binding declaration
of law. In V.M. Salgaocar & Bros. Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT (243 ITR 383), a judgment
which was cited before us on behalf of the assessees in support of the
contention that a judgment of the Supreme Court rendered under Article 136 of
the Constitution does not amount to declaration of the law since it was not
rendered in a Civil Appeal, the Supreme Court noted its earlier, judgment in
the case of SC Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India (AIR 1990 (SC)
334) in which the distinction between the dismissal of an SLP in a summary
manner without giving reasons and by a non-speaking order on the one hand and
dismissal by giving reasons and by a speaking order on the other hand was
brought out. At page 392 of (243 ITR), the following paragraph from the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of SC Employees Welfare Association
(supra) has been extracted:-

"Different considerations apply when a special leave petition under Article
136 of the Constitution is simply dismissed by saying '"dismissed", and an
appeal provided under Article 133 is dismissed also with the words "the appeal
is dismissed". In the former case it has been laid down by this court that
when a special leave petition is dismissed this court does not comment on the
correctness or otherwise of the order from which leave to appeal is sought.
But what the court means is that it does not consider it to be a fit case for
exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution. That
certainly could not be so when an appeal is dismissed though by a non-speaking
order. Here the doctrine of merger applies. In that case, the Supreme Court
upholds the decision of the High Court or of the Tribunal from which the
appeal is provided under Clause (3) of the Article 133. This doctrine of
merger does not apply in the case of dismissal of a special leave petition,
under Article 136. When an appeal is dismissed the order of the High Court is
merged with that of the Supreme Court. We quote the following paragraph from
the judgment of this court in the case of the Supreme Court Employees' Welfare
v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 334 ; (1989) 4 SCC 187 (at page 344 of AIR 1990
SC):

"22. It has been already noticed that the special leave petitions filed on
behalf of the Union of India against the said judgments of the Delhi High
Court were summarily dismissed by this court. It is now a well settled
principle of law that when a special leave petition is summarily dismissed
under Article 136 of the Constitution, by such dismissal this court does not
lay down any law, as envisaged by Article 141 of the Constitution, as
contended by the learned Attorney-General. In Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v.
State of Bihar (1987) 167 ITR 897; (1986) 4 SCC 146; AIR 1986 SC 1780, it has
been held by this court that the dismissal of a special leave petition in
limine by a non-speaking order does not justify any inference that, by
necessary implication, the contentions raised in the special leave petition on
the merits of the case have been rejected by the Supreme Court. It has been
further held that the effect of a non-speaking order of dismissal of a
special, leave petition without anything more indicating the grounds or
reasons of its dismissal must, by necessary implication, be taken to be that
the Supreme Court had decided only that it was not a fit case where special
leave should be granted. In Union of India v. All India Services Pensioners'
Association (1988) 2 SCC 580; AIR 1988 SC 501, this court has given reasons
for dismissing the special leave petition. When such reasons are given, the
decision becomes one which attracts Article 141 of the Constitution which
provides that the law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all
the courts within the territory of India. It, therefore, follows that when no
reason is given, but a special leave petition is dismissed simpliciter, it
cannot be said that there has been a declaration of law by this court under
Article 141 of the Constitution."

Thus, in the very judgment cited before us by the assessees, the distinction
between an SLP being dismissed without reasons and an SLP being dismissed by
giving elaborate reasons has been recognized. The former is not binding under
Article 141 of the Constitution whereas the latter is.

66\. We must notice one more judgment of the Supreme Court on the effect of
dismissal of an SLP by a speaking order in G. Kunhayammed and Ors. v. State of
Kerala and Anr. (245 ITR 360). At page 375 of the report, the Supreme Court
laid down the law in this regard as under:

"A petition for leave to appeal to this court may be dismissed by a non-
speaking order or by a speaking order. Whatever be the phraseology employed in
the order of dismissal, if it is a non-speaking order, i.e., it does not
assign reasons for dismissing the special leave petition, it would neither
attract the doctrine of merger so as to stand substituted in place of the
order put in issue before it nor would it be a declaration of law by the
Supreme Court under Article 141 of the Constitution for there is no law which
has been declared. If the order of dismissal be supported by reasons then also
the doctrine of merger would not be attracted because the jurisdiction
exercised was not an appellate jurisdiction but merely a discretionary
jurisdiction refusing to grant leave to appeal. We have already dealt with
this aspect earlier. Still the reasons stated by the court would attract
applicability of Article 141 of the Constitution if there is a law declared by
the Supreme Court which obviously would be binding on all the courts and
tribunals in India and certainly the parties thereto. The statement contained
in the order other than on points of law would be binding on the parties and
the court or tribunal, whose order was under challenge on the principle of
judicial discipline, this court being the apex court of the country. No court
or tribunal or parties would have the liberty of taking or canvassing any view
contrary to the one expressed by this court. The order of the Supreme Court
would mean that it has declared the law and in that light the case was
considered not fit for grant of leave. The declaration of law will be governed
by Article 141 but still, the case not being one where leave was granted, the
doctrine of merger does not apply. The court sometimes leaves the question of
law open. Or it sometimes briefly Jays down the principle, may be, contrary to
the one laid down by the High Court and yet would dismiss the special leave
petition. The reasons given are intended for purposes of Article 141. This is
so done because in the event of merely dismissing the special leave petition,
it is likely that an argument could be advanced in the High Court that the
Supreme Court has to be understood as not to have differed in law with the
High Court."(underlining ours) The above observations of the Supreme Court
show that there is a distinction between the doctrine of merger, where a
judgment of the High Court is affirmed in appeal by the Supreme Court though
by a non-speaking order or an order without assigning any reasons and the
declaration of law governed by Article 141 of the Constitution contained in an
order of the Supreme Court dismissing an SLP under Article 136 of the
Constitution by giving reasons and by passing a speaking order. From the
judgment, it is clear to us that even in an order dismissing a SLP, there
could be a declaration of law which is governed by Article 141 of the
Constitution. The contention advanced before us on behalf of the assessees was
that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kalyankumar Ray's case, though it
gave reasons for its conclusion, was nevertheless a judgment passed under
Article 136 of the Constitution of India and, therefore, it cannot be
considered to be of equal force as that of a judgment rendered by the Supreme
Court in a Civil Appeal, albeit without reasons, in which case the judgment of
the High Court merges with that of the Supreme Court. In the light of the
distinction made by the Supreme Court in the case of Kunhayammed & Others
(supra) between the theory of merger on the one hand and the binding nature of
the declaration of the law under Article 141, on the other hand, we are unable
to accept the contention on behalf of the assessees as correct. In other
words, even in an order dismissing the SLP under Article 136 of the
Constitution and thereby exercising its discretionary power, the Supreme Court
in a given case could give reasons and such reasons if they contain a
declaration of the law, would be binding on all the courts and tribunals in
India and, thereafter, no court or tribunal will have the liberty of taking a
contrary view. This precisely is the position with regard to the judgment, of
the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyankumar Ray. There, it has been held that
-

(a) Section 143(3) does require that not only the total income, but also the
amount payable thereon should be determined by an order in writing;

(b) form No. ITNS 150 is a form for determination of tax payable and when it
is signed and initialed by the AO, it is an order in writing by him
determining the tax payable within the meaning of Section 143(3); and

(c) therefore, there is no reason why this form which has been approved by the
AO should not be treated as part of the assessment order in the wider sense in
which the expression is understood in the context of Section 143(3).

This, in our humble understanding, is a declaration of the law. It follows
therefrom that if form ITNS 150 specifies the section under which the interest
is charged, it is as if the assessment order itself has specified the
particular section under which interest is charged. The conclusion that
follows from this is that the requirement that the assessment order should
contain a direction to charge interest specifying the section under which
interest is charged stands satisfied. This declaration of the law does not
appear to have been brought to the notice of the Patna High Court in Ranchi
Club Ltd. v. CIT, 222 ITR 45(supra) which was affirmed in appeal by the
Supreme Court in 247 ITR 209. This aspect of the matter, coupled with the fact
that a five judge Bench of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Anjum M.H. Ghaswala
(supra) has examined the character of the interest payable Under Sections
234A, 234B & 234C and has held that the interest chargeable under these
provisions is mandatory in nature, persuade us to take the view that the levy
of interest in the cases before us satisfies all the requirements of the law
and is perfectly valid.

67\. In the light of the above discussion, we are unable to accept the
contention that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kalyankumar Ray's case
(supra) does not have binding effect under Article 141 of the Constitution.

68\. The above discussion of ours after examining the implications of all the
judgments on the point cited before us also takes care of the contention
advanced before us on behalf of the assessees that even if the interest Under
Sections 234A to 234C is to be considered as mandatory in nature as held by
the Supreme Court in Ghaswala's case (supra), it does not relieve the AO of
the obligation to specify the section under which the interest is charged and
to mention the same clearly in the assessment order. This condition, i.e. the
particular section under which it is charged being mentioned, is satisfied in
the cases before us by the assessment forms i.e. form No. ITNS 150 in which
the particular section (i.e. Section 234A & 234B) has been mentioned, the
amount of interest calculated and shown and the forms also having been
initialed and dated by the same AO. who computed the total income in the
assessment order.

69\. With regard to the judgment of the Punjab Haryana High Court in Vinod
Khurana v. CIT and Anr. (253 ITR 578) it was submitted that the decision was
based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kalyankumar Ray's case (supra),
without appreciating the true import and effect of the judgment of the Supreme
Court. For the reasons already stated by us, we are unable to uphold the
submission.

70\. It was then argued that the "judgment-decree" theory propounded by the
Patna High Court in Ranchi Club (222 ITR 44) (supra) has not been considered
by the Punjab Haryana High Court in Vinod Khurana (supra). This theory
presupposes that the assessment order proper, i.e. the order in which the
total income is computed, and form No. ITNS-150 which is the "assessment form"
in which the calculations of the tax and the interest and the net sum payable
are shown, are separate and distinct, an assumption which is not valid in view
of the law declared by the Supreme Court in Kalyankumar Ray (supra) to the
effect that the "assessment form" (form No. ITNS-150) is to be treated as part
of the assessment order in the wider sense in which the expression has to be
understood in the context of Section 143(3). Another argument put forth was
that if the specific section is not mentioned and a vague direction to charge
interest is given in the assessment order proper it will put the office of the
AO in considerable difficulty and confusion and may place on them the
responsibility to apply the relevant section, which would be against the law.
The answer to this is also provided in Kalyankumar Ray (supra) when the
Supreme Court observed that the Form No. ITNS-150 is to be signed or initialed
by the AO as a mark of approval. It is thus ultimately the AO who is in law
responsible for what is stated in the said form, be it the section under which
the interest is charged or the arithmetical calculations. Several situations
were cited as illustrations in the course of the arguments to show that
important issues relevant for charging interest may call for determination by
the AO and these cannot be left to the office of the AO. For instance, the due
date for filing the return of income may first have to be fixed. Under
Explanation 2 to Section 139(1), it was pointed out, it may have to be seen if
the assessee, if it is a firm, is subject to the audit Under Section 44AB or
if there are working partners/non-working partners and so on, which will
determine what is the due date for filing the return. Another example cited
was that of a person being treated as the agent of a non-resident by order
dated 31.12.97; in such a case, the AO has to first decide if the due date can
be taken as 31.7.97 as is normally done; he has to then decide the question as
to from which date interest can be charged Under Section 234A. The point
sought to be made was that all such intricate questions will have to be
necessarily determined by the AO and he cannot possibly leave them to the
office staff. All these examples certainly drive home the point taken, to the
extent that reasons have to be spelt out for the levy of interest. But, we
cannot accept the contention that if reasons are not furnished, the levy
should be struck down as invalid. To repeat, since the levy is mandatory the
moment default has occurred the liability arises. If the AO has not furnished
the reasons all that can be directed is to establish the default and an
opportunity should be afforded to the assessee to show that there is no
default. We have earlier referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in
State of Haryana v. Hari Ram Yadav (supra) where it was held that a suspension
order cannot be quashed merely because the satisfaction of the Governor has
not been recited in the suspension order, because the condition precedent is
that the satisfaction should have been reached as a matter of fact and not
that the satisfaction should have been recited in the order. Similarly, it is
the occurrence of the default as a fact that gives rise to the liability to
pay interest; if the reasons are not recited in the assessment order, it only
affects the procedural aspect - the rules of natural justice -which can be
cured by directing the parties to establish their rival positions. There may
be quite a simple case, where the return of income was filed on the due date
itself, say 31.7.97. The AO mistakenly takes the date as 30.11.97 and interest
Under Section 234A is charged. This is of course invalid since in fact there
was no default. But, that has to be established and on whom the burden lies is
laid down in the judgment of the Supreme Court cited above. So also, where a
return is filed on 30.11.97, where the due date is 31.7.97, but the AO does
not charge interest. Just because he has not stated anything in the assessment
order or in the Form No. ITNS-150 regarding interest Under Section 234A, in
the light of the legal position propounded in Ghaswalla's case (surpa), can it
be said that the assessee did not commit any default and interest liability
did not arise? The answer in our opinion is in the negative. We must however
confess that the question of default may not be a simple one, and the assessee
may take up several contentions to deny that he had defaulted. In fact we
shall presently refer to the arguments of Mr. Dastur, learned counsel for
Ericsson, in support of his claim that there was no such default as would
attract Section 234B. The contention of Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for
the department that the application of mind by the AO is reflected in the
assessment order itself and that the view which the assessee may take
regarding his obligations (re: filing of return, payment of advance-tax etc.)
is not relevant is, with respect, too widely stated. The liability of the
assessee and the default must be demonstrated in the assessment order
objectively, not subjectively. There should be an adjudication of the issue by
the AO in a fair manner. That is possible only if he hears the assessee and
gives reasons for his decision. If he has not done so, it would be open to the
appellate authorities to direct him to do so. We have to bear in mind that
interest is compensatory - the assessee is asked to compensate the Government
for unlawfully withholding or delaying payment of taxes or filing of returns -
and once the default on the part of the assessee is already established, it
shall be paid.

71\. On merits, arguments were put forth on behalf of Ericsson with regard to
the liability to pay interest Under Section 234B. They run as follows. Section
234B is attracted only where advance-tax is not paid despite an obligation to
pay. But, there is no obligation. The steps involved for determining the
liability to pay advance-tax are outlined in Section 209. Under Section
209(1)(d), the tax estimated to be payable on the current income shall be
reduced by the amount of tax which would be "deductible" or "collectible" at
source during the previous year under any provision of the Act. Even if the
assessee is answerable in respect of the income (which is in dispute in the
appeal) it is entitled not to pay the advance-tax because the tax is
"deductible" by the payer, though not actually deducted by him. If tax is not
so deducted, the department is entitled to treat the payer as in default Under
Section 201(1). The department is also entitled to recover interest from him
Under Section 201(1 A). Therefore, the department cannot seek to recover the
interest from the assessee and enjoy a double advantage. The interest is
essentially compensatory in nature and no double advantage can be permitted.

72\. In support of the above arguments, reliance was placed on the following
orders of the Tribunal:

1\. Sedco Forex International Drilling Inc. v. DCIT, 72 ITD 415 (Del.)

2.Asia Satellite, (85 ITD 110) (at para. 10.1) (Del.)

3.ACIT v. Rheinbraun (order of the Mumbai Bench of the Tribunal - copy filed)
(supra).

73\. The above arguments were also adopted by the other two assessees.

74\. The arguments show that the assessees are denying their liability to pay
interest on the ground that they have not committed "my default which would
attract Section 234B. According to them, they are not liable to pay he advance
tax. This contention has not been raised before the AO obviously because the
assessees have not been given an opportunity to do so. It is a very important
contention which goes to the root of the matter and merits serious
consideration. The CIT(A) appears to have dealt with the issue relating to the
interest on two aspects. In the case of Nokia in para. 10 of his order, he has
deleted the levy of interest Under Section 234B on the ground that all the
payments to the assessee were liable for deduction of tax at source Under
Section 195 and, therefore, the assessee was not liable to pay advance tax. He
has followed the order of the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Sedco
Forex International Drilling Inc.(supra). As regards the levy of interest
Under Section 234A, he has relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd. (supra) where the judgment of the Patna High
Court in which it was held that the interest was leviable on the assessee as
per the return and not as per the assessment order was upheld. The CIT(A) in
the connection noted that the assessee filed a nil return. In the case of
Motorola, he has given the same decision in para. 11 of his order. In the case
of Ericsson also, he has taken the same view in para. 10 of his order. So far
as the interest Under Section 234A is concerned, is seen that Explanation (4)
to the said Section which provided that the tax on the total income as
determined on regular assessment shall, for the purposes of computing the
interest payable Under Section 140A, be deemed to be tax on the total income
as declared in the return, has been omitted with retrospective effect from
1.4.1989. The judgment of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd. (SC)
was rendered on the basis of Explanation (4) to Section 234A which has now
been omitted from the Act with retrospective effect. In view of the change in
the law with retrospective effect, the interest shall be computed on the basis
of the tax determined on regular assessment and not on the basis of the tax
payable on the basis of the return. The CIT(A) has also held that since there
is no direction in the assessment order to charge interest, on the basis of
the aforesaid judgment c f the Supreme Court, interest has to be deleted. We
have already seen that such a view cannot be accepted. We have given reasons
therefor. With regard to Section 234B, here also, the view of the CIT(A) is on
the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court cited above. This view of the
CIT(A) for the reasons already stated cannot be upheld. The CIT(A) has also
examined the merits of the assessees' claim that they are not liable to pay
the advance tax and in the absence of any liability there is no default and
hence no interest is chargeable Under Section 234B. On this aspect, no strong
grounds have been made out on behalf of the department to doubt the
correctness of the view taken by the Delhi & Mumbai Benches of the Tribunal in
the orders cited supra. The language of Section 209(1)(d) of the Act supports
the assessees' contention. All the payments made to the assessees are tax
deductible at source (even assuming that they are taxable) as rightly held by
the CIT(A) and also contended before us. In that case, having regard to the
provisions of Section 201(1) & 201(1 A) to which our attention was drawn on
behalf of the assessees, the assessees cannot be held to have committed
default in paying the advance tax. They are entitled to take into account the
tax which is deductible by the payer, though not actually deducted.
Consequently, there is no liability to pay interest. The decision of the
CIT(A) to cancel the interest Under Section 234B is upheld on merits. As
regards the interest Under Section 234A, the matter is restored to the file of
the AO in all the three cases so that a proper adjudication can be made with
regard to the applicability of the section so that both sides will have an
opportunity of putting forth their respective stands clearly.

75\. In the case of Ericsson, it was also pointed out that the notice of
demand Under Section 156 is not dated. However, two different demand notices
were filed before us during the hearing, one of which is dated 28.3.2000 which
is the same date as the assessment order and the other does not bear the date.
The assessment year as well as the total sum demanded are the same in both the
notices, namely, Rs. 69,39,70,769. Both the copies have been filed on behalf
of the assessee. Since one of them bears the date, the argument that the
demand notice is not dated loses force or factual basis. Even if it is assumed
that the demand notice is not dated, we are of the view that the defect can be
ignored in the light of Section 292B of the Act, because the demand notice is
in substance and effect in conformity with the intent and purpose of the Act.
It is in conformity with form No. ITNS 150 which has been signed by the same
AO and which also bears the date 28.3.2000 which is the same as the assessment
order. This form also contains the break up of the tax as well as the
interest. The interest amount has been shown separately Under Sections 234A &
234B. In view of this, there is no merit in the contention that since the
demand notice is not dated, the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court
(supra) is not applicable. We may clarify that no such contention was
canvassed on behalf of the other two assessees, namely, Nokia & Motorola,
since in both the cases the demand notices are dated.

76\. Some emphasis was placed on the order of the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal
in the case of V.V. Industries v. ACIT (2003) 78 TTJ (Del) 758. In this order
all the judgments of the Supreme Court, namely, CIT v. Ranchi Club Ltd.,
Kalyankumar Ray v. CIT and CIT v. Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (all cited supra) have
been considered as also the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in the
case of Vinod Khurana (supra) and it was held that in the absence of any
direction in the assessment order in charging the interest and any indication
in the notice of demand about the figure of interest, the levy cannot be
upheld. A reading of para. 13 of the Tribunal's order shows that there was not
even an observation or a direction for charging interest in the assessment
order. Para.17 of the Tribunal's order shows that even in the notice of
demand, there was no mention of any interest figure. The Tribunal has noted in
this paragraph that nothing was brought to their notice about any calculation
sheet having been provided to the assessee since no copy thereof was filed by
the assessee, nor was the assessment record produced before them for
verification despite a specific direction to that effect. Para. 19 of the
order of the Tribunal shows that the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Kalyankumar Ray's case was held inapplicable because the assessment order and
the demand notice did not contain a word about the levy of interest. In the
present cases, the assessment order shows "charge interest" in the cases of
Ericsson & Motorola and "charge interest as per law" in the case of Nokia,
though the specific section under which the interest is charged is not
mentioned in the body of the assessment orders in all the three cases.
Further, the specific section under which interest is charged is mentioned in
the Form ITNS-150 in all the three cases. Thus, there is a factual difference
between the present cases and the case of V.V. Industries (supra). Even
otherwise, a perusal of para.22 of the Tribunal's order shows that the Bench
has taken the view that Anjum M.H. Ghaswala's case (supra) pertains to the
powers of Settlement Commission to waive or reduce interest and does not
overrule Ranchi Club Ltd. (surpa) which is a direct decision on the point at
issue. We have earlier given reasons as to why we are unable to take, with
respect, such a simplistic view of the matter. We have also given our reasons
as to why the law declared by the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyankumar Ray
(supra) though in an order dismissing an SLP under Article 136 of the
Constitution, is equally binding on us. In this view of the matter, we are
unable to approve of the reasoning contained in para.22 of the order of the
Tribunal in the case of V.V. Industries.

77\. Our attention was also drawn to the judgment of the jurisdictional High
Court in CIT v. Insilco Ltd. In this case, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court
admitted an appeal by the department against the order of the Tribunal
deleting the interest up 234B on the ground that the assessee was under a bona
fide belief that its income was not chargeable to tax. The appeal was admitted
on the ground that a substantial question of law was involved. By the same
judgment, the Hon'ble High Court was pleased to refuse admission to the appeal
of the department against the order of the Tribunal for another year in the
same assessee's case, deleting the interest charged Under Section 234B on the
ground that the assessment order did not mention the specific section under
which the interest is to be levied. We are unable to give effect to the
argument of the assessee based on the judgment for the reasons stated by us
earlier and in the light of the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of
Kalyankumar Ray and Anjum M.H. Ghaswala (surpa).

78\. To summarise the findings as regards the appeals before us, we hold that
-

(a) the issue relating to levy of interest Under Section 234A is restored to
the AO in all the three cases with the direction contained in paragraph 74 of
our order;

(b) with regard to levy of interest Under Section 234B, the same is held
rightly deleted by the CIT(A) in all the three cases.

79\. As regards the legal question posed before the Special bench, we hold
that the levy of interest under Sections 234A to 234C cannot be held to be
invalid merely on account of there being no specific direction in the
assessment order or on the ground that the section under which the interest is
levied is not specified in the body of the assessment order, provided that the
assessment form in ITNS-150 contains a specific reference to the section under
which the interest is charged, the calculations are shown under the relevant
columns and the said form is signed as initialed by the same AO who signed the
assessment order and is also dated.

80\. We now proceed to dispose of the cross-appeals assessee-wise.

ERICSSON (Arguments') Whether any income accrues in India

81\. The basic contention of Mr. G.C. Sharma, the learned counsel for the
revenue was that the entire income accrued in India Under Section 5(2) and
Section 9(1)(i) of the I.T.Act. While admitting that the onus is on the
revenue to show that the income accrued in India, he contended: that once this
burden is discharged, the onus shifts to the assessee to show that no income
accrued in India. In this background, the first contention of Mr. Sharma was
that the supply contract, the installation contract and the business promotion
agreement have all to be read together and if so read, the conclusion would be
inescapable that all of them are inseparable, intertwined and impinge on each
other, with the result that they have to be viewed as one integrated whole,
which in turn would mean that the whole object of the parties is to execute a
works contract and it is not a case of a mere sale of goods. The works
contract theory put forward by Mr. Sharma was supported by him with reference
to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. v. State of
Andhra Pradesh (2000) 6 SCC 579. He further submitted that the agreements
should be looked at [from the business point of view of the cellular operators
and the requirement of the operators in India. What the cellular operators
wanted under the agreements is to set up a GSM Cellular Exchange in the site
approved by the Department of Telecommunications (DOT). The cellular operator
is not interested in the hardware alone or in the software alone. He is
interested in the system as a whole and not merely the system in the abstract,
but a system which is properly installed by the installation contractor. It is
in this view of the matter that Mr. Sharma contended that the three contracts
put together amounted to a works contract and not a mere sale of goods. In
this connection, he also submitted that by disintegrating the entire works
contract into three separate agreements namely the supply contract, the
installation contract and the business promotion agreement, the parties have
attempted to evade tax and, therefore, it would be open to the income-tax
authorities to lift the veil of the transaction on the strength of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Mc Dowell and Co. Ltd. v.
Commercial Tax Officer (154 ITR 148) and thwart the object of the parties in
splitting a single transaction into, three parts. Mr. Sharma in this
connection strongly relied on the overall agreement which is a tripartite
agreement entered into on the same day as the other three agreements between
the assessee, the cellular operators and the installation contractor which
provided for proper coordination of the supply and installation contracts.
According to him, this overall agreement clearly showed that all the
transactions constituted a single integrated transaction.

82\. With reference to Section 9(1)(i) of the Act, Mr. Sharma submitted that
the connection between the cellular operators in India and the assessee
constituted a business connection since what links them with each other is the
purchase of the GSM Cellular system. In this regard he pointed out that the
Indian company which is a party to the business promotion agreement is a
hundred percent subsidiary of the assessee company and, therefore, there is a
direct business connection and, therefore, the income directly arose to the
assessee in India. According to him, whatever is the tax implication of the
connection, it was certainly a business connection. According to Mr. Sharma,
the connection can arise out of a series of transactions between the generator
of the income and the recipient thereof. If the activity which produces the
income is located in India, the source of the income is also in India, and
thus the income accrues or arises also in India. Mr. Sharma at this juncture
pointed out that in the case of Motorola and Nokia, the assessee did not raise
the contention that there is no business connection and, therefore, the income
did not accrue or arise in India. He also relied on the findings of the CIT(A)
at page 39 of his order. In connection with the accrual of income in India,
Mr. Sharma strongly relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in 20th
Century Finance Corporation Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra (119 STC 182). He
drew our attention to paragraphs 21, 25 and 28 of the judgment to drive home
the point that though there is no fixed yardstick to ascertain the situs of
the sale, still the place where the contract of sale is concluded could be
taken as the situs of the sale. In the present case the contention of the
revenue is that the sale of the GSM cellular system was concluded in India,
where the contract was signed on 2.7.1996 and, therefore, the situs of the
sale was in India and consequently the income arose to the non-resident
assessee in India.

83\. Mr. Sharma also filed written submissions titled "Ericsson Radio System
case -brief facts of the case" in which all his contentions on all the points
in issue were briefly summarized.

Permanent establishment:

84\. At the outset, we may clarify that while referring to the DTAAs, Mr.
Sharma had taken the DTAA with USA as the example since this DTAA was involved
in the case of Motorola and his references to the various articles of the DTAA
with USA will have to be read as references to the corresponding articles in
the DTAAs with Sweden (in the case of Ericsson) and Finland (in the case of
Nokia).

84.1. Mr. G.C. Sharma's main contention was that the assessee's case rested on
the ground that there was no Permanent Establishment (PE) within the meaning
of Article 5 of the DTAA. The significance of the issue relating to PE lies in
the fact that if there is no PE in India, Article 7 of the DTAA cannot apply
and the assessee will not be liable to tax on the business profits. On the
other hand, if it is established that the assessee has a PE in India, then
Article 7 of the DTAA is attracted and profits to the extent they are
attributable to the PE are taxable in India. With this preface he referred to
the relevant Articles in the DTAA starting with Article 5 wherein he
emphasized on the word "through" to submit that if the operations are carried
out through a PE in India, the business profits would be taxable in India. He
further submitted that even if the operations are partly carried out through a
PE in India, then also business profits would be taxable.

84.2. Advancing his arguments further, it was submitted that a "fixed place"
means an identifiable place from which business is carried on. It was
submitted that carrying on of business was not a single act but a series of
activities and this very concept was also reflected in Article 7 of the DTAA.
He then referred to Article 5.2 of the DTAA and pointed out that it was an
inclusive definition and the exclusions were provided in Article 5.3 and it is
for the assessee to show that it falls within the exclusionary article. He
referred to Clause (k) of Article 5.2 which included a "site" in the
definition of PE and submitted that the site where the work was carried out by
the assessee becomes a PE in India. Likewise he referred to Clause (e) of
Article 5.3 which refers to a marketing office as a PE and in this connection
he referred to the Market Support Agreement to show that the assessee did fell
within Clause (e) of Article 5.3 and had a marketing office in India. It was
not possible to accept that even without a marketing office they carried on
business in India on such scale. He extensively referred to the written
submissions filed by him in this connection, especially page 3 thereof, where
the judgment of the Italian Supreme Court in a similar matter has been
referred to. His submission was that the facts before the Italian Supreme
Court were similar to the facts of the present case and in that case the
concept of group PE has been expounded by the Italian Supreme Court. In the
present case also, the assessee was a subsidiary company of LME Sweden, the
installation contractor, namely, ECI is also a subsidiary of LME, and hence
his point was that the assessee satisfied the concept of group PE as per the
decision of the Italian Supreme Court. Thus, the assessee had a PE in India.

84.3. Mr. G.C. Sharma also submitted that there is a reference to the
assessee's country manager in India in the supply contract. The country
manager's residence in India would meet the requirements of a PE as per the
DTAA. In this connection he strongly relied on the ruling of the Authority for
Advance Ruling (AAR) in the case of Sutron Corporation v. DI 138 Taxman
87(2004).

84.4. Mr. Sharma also referred to the fact that the arguments relating to PE
in the present case are the same as those in the case of Motorola and that he
may be taken as having argued the question of PE on all its four aspects
namely: (i) Service PE, (ii) Installation PE, (iii) Fixed place PE and (iv)
Group PE. In this regard he referred to group P:E as including the agency PE
also. He also filed written submissions in the case of Ericsson.

85\. Mr. Dastur, while starting his reply to Mr. G.C. Sharma's arguments,
raised a preliminary objection by referring to the ground taken by the
Revenue. He referred to ground No. 1.(i) in the appeal filed by the Department
and pointed out that as per the ground there was a contract between the
assessee and the Indian cellular operators for installation. He clarified that
this was factually incorrect as there was no agreement at all between this
assessee and the cellular operator for installation. The agreement with the
cellular operator was only for the supply of the system. He further clarified
that the assessee in the present case, namely, Ericsson Radio Systems AB (ERA
for short) is a subsidiary of a Swedish Company called "LME". Another
subsidiary of LME, namely, Ericsson Telephone Corpn. India AB (EFC for short)
had a branch in India upto June, 1996 i.e. for a period of three months and
with this branch the assessee had marketing agreements for that period of
three months. There is another Indian company known as "Ericsson
Communications Ltd." (ECI for short) which acted as marketing and installation
contractor for nine months. This company is also stated to be a subsidiary of
LME. In a nutshell, for the first three months, the assessee had a marketing
agreement with EFC and for the remaining nine months it had an agreement with
ECI. The installation contract was between ECI and the cellular operators it
was also pointed out that EFC and ECI both were assessed to tax in India for
the income earned by them respectively from the marketing and installation
contracts. Thus on this ground it was contended by Mr. Dastur that the first
ground taken by the revenue was misconceived. However, he submitted that even
assuming that the ground actually referred to supply agreement, then also he
was ready to argue that there can be no PE in India.

85.1. Referring to ground No. 1(ii) he raised a preliminary objection that it
refers only to a fixed place of business, though Mr. Sharma had argued the
case on all the four aspects which he could not have argued within the scope
of the ground raised. In this connection he submitted that mere user of the
place does not give rise to PE and if the assesse's employees went to EFC's
office that per se does not become a PE. According to him a place should be
available to and should be at the disposal of the assessee. As an
illustration, he pointed out that if rooms were permanently booked in a
particular hotel, it may be called affixed place of business but if the rooms
were booked in different hotels at different points of time, then it would not
give rise to a fixed place of business. It was then submitted that if fixed
tables were at the disposal of the assessees employees in the office of the
Indian associate, then it would be a fixed place PE. The CIT(A) has held that
the assessee had no fixed PE and the onus was on the revenue to show that the
finding of the CIT(A) was wrong and that this onus has not been discharged.

85.2. With the above preliminary objection, Mr. Dastur started with the facts
of the case stating that the assessee had entered into contracts with 10
cellular operators in India. One contract was for the sale of hardware and
software and which is called the supply contract with the cellular operators
in India. The second contract, known as installation contract was between the
cellular operators and the branch (EFC) for the first three months and between
the cellular operators and the ECI for the remaining nine months. He took the
supply contract entered into with JT Mobiles (Cellular operator) as the
representative case as was done by the income-tax authorities themselves. At
the outset, it was pointed out that this contract was for the supply of
hardware and software for a total consideration of US Dollars 15,466,862. It
was specifically pointed out that it was a total supply contract,
predominantly for the supply of hardware, and software was also included in it
to make the hardware work. Then he referred to the various clauses of the
supply contract. Our particular attention was drawn to Clause 13 of the
contract to show that the title and risk in the GSM system was to pass outside
India at Sweden when they were, delivered to the carrier at Swedish Port. He
referred to the relevant provisions of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 to show
that the intention of the parties should govern as to when the title and risk
passed in the goods. The time and place when the title and risk in the goods
passed can be inferred from the terms of the contract, conduct of the parties
and the surrounding circumstances as per Section 19(2) of the Sale of Goods
Act. However, in the present case there was no necessity for such an inference
as the agreement itself was very specific as to when the title and risk were
to pass. It was pointed out by him that the Project Manager referred to in the
supply contract was situated outside India and the Project Manager referred to
in the installation contract was to be at the site in India. Referring to
Clause 18 of the contract it was submitted by Mr. Dastur that the acceptance
test did not determine the passing of the property in view of Clause 13 of the
contract. Mr. Dastur referred to the other clauses of the supply contract such
as those dealing with financing of the software (Clause 20), warranties
(Clause 21), additional orders (Clause 26), termination of the contract
(Clause 31), notices to be issued (Clause 36), export etc. (Clause 40.3), to
contend that the supply contract is a complete and self-functioning contract
of sale and though there is an overall agreement which coordinates the supply
and installation contracts, that was only a sort of a memorandum of
understanding and the ultimate and enforceable effective contract was only the
supply contract.

85.3. Mr. Dastur next took us through the installation contract which is at
page 42 of the paper book No. 1. Briefly he took us through the various
clauses of this contract such as Clause 5 which defined the scope of the
contract, Clause 7 which mentioned the price of installation at US $
3,048,263, which according to him constituted a substantial portion of the
overall contract price of US $ 15,466,862, Clause 10 which referred to
transportation, Clause 14 which referred to the project control and Clause 15
which referred to the acceptance and Clause 19 which referred to assignment of
the contract. Referring to the price for the installation contract, it was
submitted that it was a negotiated price. This point was highlighted by Mr.
Dastur against the allegation of the revenue that more price was deliberately
attached to the supply contract because the income arising therefrom was not
taxable in India. It was also pointed out that the installation contractor was
assessed on this income in India. Copies of relevant assessment orders are
placed on record. Referring to Clause 15 which dealt with the acceptance test.
Mr. Dastur submitted that the date of acceptance is subsequent to the passing
of the title and therefore is irrelevant for the purpose of determining when
and where the title passed and further that the assessee continued to be
liable even for the acceptance test as referred to in Clause 18 of the supply
contract.

85.4. Mr. Dastur referred to the "marketing and business promotion agreement"
entered into between EFC and the assessee (page 63 of paper book No. 1) and to
the various services which are to be rendered by EFC under this agreement and
submitted that a combined reading of all of them would show that EFC was not
responsible for the various acts and services which it had to render under the
agreement. He also submitted that the terms of the agreement were very
restrictive in nature and indicated the parameters within which the branch
(EFC) had to operate.

85.5. Mr. Dastur thereafter made a reference to the "overall agreement" which
has also been entered into on 2.7.1996 between the assessee, ECI and JTM. The
preamble to the agreement stated that the primary purpose of the overall
agreement was to ensure better coordination between the parties and the
security of the cellular operators. The overall agreement, it was contended,
was a sort of memorandum of understanding but no consideration was payable
thereunder. Such an agreement, according to Mr. Dastur would have most
probably been entered into even if the installation of the equipment was to be
done by an Indian company. In response to a query from the Bench as to whether
JTM had a right, under the overall agreement to terminate the installation
contract. Mr. Dastur answered in the affirmative and drew our attention to
Clause 25.1.1 and Clause 25.1.2 of the installation contract. This clause
provided for termination of the two contracts namely the supply contract and
the installation contract separately which was a pointer to his earlier
contention that these agreements were not one but they were quite independent.
His submission was that the overall agreement does in no way affect the
assessee's liability to tax. He drew our attention also to instruction No.
1829 dated 21.9.1989 issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes (copy filed
at page 81 of the paper book No. 1) which recognizes the practice of the
parties in such contracts to enter into an overall agreement for better
coordination.

85.6. On the basis of the above facts, Mr. Dastur formulated two basic
propositions which according to him are fundamental to the resolution of the
case. The first proposition was whether any income accrued to the assessee
under the provisions of Section 5(2) and Section 9(1) of the Income-tax Act,
1961 and if the answer to this question is in the affirmative, whether the
DTAA between India and Sweden does in any way mitigate the tax liability. One
word of caution was also administered by him to the effect that the DTAA is
not an exemption claimed by the assessee from the tax liability and that it
was only an alternative scheme of taxation, alternative to the Income-tax Act,
and the fact that the assessee relies on the provisions of the DTAA to
mitigate its tax liability does not mean that it is claiming any exemption
and, therefore, the burden is on it to show that it is entitled to the
exemption. On the other hand it is for the revenue, according to Mr. Dastur,
to demonstrate that even under the provisions of DTAA the assessee as liable
to tax. The entire case, according to him must be approached on these
premises.

85.7. With reference to the supply contract which forms the basis for
determination of the question as to whether the provisions of Section 5(2) or
Section 9(1)(i) of the Act applies to the assessee, Mr. Dastur drew our
attention to the basic operations carried out by the assessee in India. This
fact assumes importance because Under Section 9(1)(i), a business connection
has to be established and even if a business connection is established, under
Clause (a) of Explanation 2 below the above section, the tax liability of the
assessee is limited to the operations carried out by it in India. Therefore,
it is very essential that the nature of the assessee's operations in India are
first ascertained. According to Mr. Dastur-

a) There was no manufacture of any equipment in India,

b) There was no sale of any equipment in India;

c) There was no research activity carried out in India;

d) The installation of the equipment, though in India, is not carried out by
the assessee. The income from the installation contract has been taken into
account in the case of the installation contractor and assessed in its hands.

e) The marketing and business promotion activity which is carried on in India
is not carried out by the assessee but is carried out either by the branch
(EFC) or by ECI, the Indian company, which are entities separate from the
assessee. The income from this activity has been assessed in their respective
hands.

Therefore, it was contended by Mr. Dastur that since no operations were
carried out in India by the assessee, no income accrued to it either Under
Section 5(2) or no income was deemed to accrue to the assessee Under Section
9(1) of the Act.

86\. Turning to the DTAA between India and Sweden, Mr. Dastur drew our
attention to Article 7 thereof which provided for the determination of the
business profits. Under this Article, the business profits of a foreign
enterprise are taxable in India only if that enterprise has a PE in India.
Further, even if the foreign enterprise has a PE in India, the business
profits that are taxable in its hands are only those which are attributable to
that PE in India.

86.1. Mr. Dastur submitted that it would be his endeavour to show that the
assessee was not liable to tax in India either under the Income-tax Act or
under the DTAA.

86.2. Mr. Dastur thereafter took us through the relevant part in the order of
the CIT(Appeals) where the provisions of Section 5(2) and Section 9(1) have
been discussed by him. In feet the assessee has filed a cross objection
against this part of the order of the CIT(A) but Mr. Dastur submitted that he
would also support the ultimate decision of the CIT(Appeals) to the effect
that there is no PE in India under Rule 27 of the ITAT Rules by also
challenging his decision in respect of the above mentioned provisions of the
Act. His first contention was that Section 5(2)(b) speaks of deemed accrual.
According to him no income actually accrued in India in favour of the assessee
and the only question is whether there is any deemed accrual because a part of
the operations of the assessee were allegedly carried on in India. In this
connection he submitted that it is necessary that a substantial part of the
assesse's activities have to be in India and some stray activity in India
cannot enable the income-tax authorities to hold that some income accrued to
the assessee in India. In support of this proposition he referred to several
authorities which we may notice presently.

86.3. The first decision to which our attention was drawn was the decision of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court in CIT v. Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (109 ITR 158)
in which it was held that the mere giving of a guarantee is not a normal
incidence of sale, that merely because the employees of the foreign enterprise
served in India, did not result in any business connection in India and that
such an arrangement was merely incidental to the supply of the equipment and
further that a mere purchase and sale in India is not sufficient to hold that
income accrued in India. The next decision referred to was that of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd. v. Addl.CIT (119 ITR
986) in which it was held that a FOB sale (free on board) by the foreign
company at the European port amounted to a sale outside the country and not a
sale in India. In Addl. CIT v. Skoda Export, Praha (172 ITR 358), the Andhra
Pradesh High Court held that no profits accrued in India on sale of machinery
outside India even though it might be part of the business connection. In this
case, the test of predominance of the object of the contract was adverted to.
In CIT v. Energomach Exports (232 ITR 448), the Karnataka High Court held that
no business connection can be inferred merely because the foreign company
deputed its employees in connection with the contract for supply of equipment.
The highlight of this decision is that there were two agreements, one for
supply and installation of the equipment, and another entered into on the same
day for deputing employees to supervise the installation of the equipment. But
despite this no business connection was found to be established. In CIT v.
Gulf Oil (Great Britain) Ltd. (108 ITR 874), the Bombay High Court held that
even if the foreign company acts through its subsidiary in India, no business
connection could be inferred. Mr. Dastur laid much stress on the judgments of
the Madras High Court in CIT v. Anamallais Timber Trust Ltd. (18 ITR 333) and
Annamalais Timber Trust & Co. v. CIT (41 ITR 781). In the first of these
decisions, the question examined was with reference to pure accrual of income
in a case where the contract of sale was signed in India. It was held that a
very small portion of the income did accrue in India because the contract was
signed in India. In the second decision, the Madras High Court held that only
10% of the profits may be apportioned to the trading operations carried on in
British India, in a case where the negotiations in respect of the contract
took place in British India and the contract was also concluded in British
India. Relying on this decision, it was submitted by Mr. Dastur that in the
present case even this much of profit, if considered as having accrued in
India, would be excessive because under the marketing and business promotion
agreement between the assessee and ECI/EFC, the assessee was not bound by the
opinion of ECI/ EFC and it (assessee) was the sole authority to scrutinize the
offers and decide the buyer or buyers. No authority was given to either EFC or
ECI to choose the buyer or buyers and conclude the contracts with them. Mr.
Dastur, therefore, submitted that even 10% of the profits cannot be said to
have accrued in India, even applying the second of the judgments of the Madras
High Court referred to above.

86.4. In DCIT v. Taikisha Ltd. (52 TTJ 594), the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal
held that the sale of equipment was completed in Japan despite the fact that
the assessee in that case had a PE in India. In this order, at para 8 at page
59 of the report, the argument of the revenue that the contract was a works
contract was considered and negated. It was also held in this order that the
performance guarantee given by the foreign company in connection with the
supply of equipment was a normal incidence of such contracts. In Dy. CIT v.
CIT Alcatel (47 ITD 275), the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal held that just
because the foreign company rendered support services through an establishment
in India, it did not amount to a PE in India. In that case though there was no
specific clause in the agreement relating to passing of title, the Tribunal
inferred that title passed to the Indian company in the foreign country itself
from the fact that the insurance premium was paid by the Indian company. With
reference to this part of the order, Mr. Dastur pointed out that in the
present case there is no need to draw such an inference because Clause 13 of
the supply contract expressly stated that both title and risk in respect of
the GSM cellular system passed at the same time at the Swedish Port. In
support of this contention, Mr. Dastur drew our attention to Sections 18 and
26 of the Sale of Goods Act and also to the INCOTERMS, 1990.

86.5. The next point urged by Mr. Dastur was that Mr. G.C. Sharma, who argued
the appeal on behalf of the income-tax authorities was wrong in construing the
supply contract, the installation contract and the overall agreement together
and drawing the conclusion that the intention of the parties, as manifested on
a combined reading of all the three documents together, is that the assessee
should execute a works contract for the cellular operators, the works contract
being the setting up of the GSM cellular system. His preliminary objection was
that this is a new case made out by the Department at the stage of the
Tribunal which should not be permitted. Nevertheless, he proceeded to meet the
objection on merits. He pointed out firstly that the A.O. himself has not made
a single assessment combining the profits of the supply contract and the
installation contract. The installation profits have been assessed in the
hands of a different entity namely the Installation Contractor, which
according to Mr. Dastur, nullifies the works contract theory put forward by
Mr. Sharma. Similarly, he pointed out that the business promotion profits have
been assessed separately in the hands of the EFC/ECI, which also weakens the
argument of Mr. Sharma that the assessee had executed a works contract for the
cellular operators. In this behalf, he filed copies of the assessment orders
of Ericsson Communications Pvt. Ltd., the Indian company, for the assessment
years 1997-98 to 2001-02 as well as the assessment orders of Ericsson
Telephone Corpn. A.B. for the assessment year 1997-98. He pointed out that
these assessments have attained finality and what has been done in these
assessments cannot be undone now merely by putting forward the theory of works
contract at this late stage. He further submitted that the result of accepting
this new argument would be to assess the entire profits in the hands of the
assessee which would amount to double taxation, the installation profits and
the business promotion profits having already been assessed in the hands of
the separate entities as mentioned above. He drew our attention to the
judgment of the Delhi High Court in CIT v. R. Dalmia (135 ITR 346) and that of
the Supreme Court in CWT v. K.N. Shanmughasundaram (232 ITR 354) in which it
has been held that double taxation of the same income should be avoided.

86.6. With regard to the merits of the works contract theory, Mr. Dastur
submitted that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hindustan Shipyard v.
State of Andhra Pradesh (supra), cited by Mr. Sharma was rendered in an
entirely different context. He drew our attention particularly to para 14 of
the judgment in which the relevant principles to be applied for the purpose of
finding out whether the contract is a works contract have been stated. Mr.
Dastur further submitted that all the tests laid down in this judgment have
been answered positively in the assessee's case thereby negating the works
contract theory. In the alternative, Mr. Dastur submitted that even if it is
assumed for the sake of argument that the theory of works contract applies to
the present case, only those profits which are attributable to the Indian
operations of the assessee can be assessed.

86.7. With reference to the argument of Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for
the revenue, to the effect that the assessee has attempted to disintegrate the
composite works contract into three parts namely the supply contract, the
installation contract and the business promotion agreement and thereby adopted
a game plan to evade taxes lawfully due to the Indian government, Mr. Dastur
protested that there was no such attempt on the part of the assessee to evade
any taxes payable in India under the Income-tax Act. He submitted that the
profits of the installation contract as also the profits under the business
promotion agreements have suffered tax, though in the hands of separate
entities and this itself showed that there was no attempt to evade any taxes.
Strong reliance was placed by him on the judgment of the Supreme Court in UOI
and Anr v. Azadi Bachao Andolan and Anr. (263 ITR 706 at page 755, 762). He
pointed out that in this case the ruling of the Supreme Court in Mc Dowell's
case has been considerably watered down, and it has been held that so long as
a transaction is legally valid, its economic effects are not to be looked
into. He pointed out that a mere reference to the rule in McDowell does not
carry the case of the revenue further, unless some evidence or material is
brought forth in support of the claim of tax evasion.

86.8. Referring to Mr. Sharma's strong reliance on the judgment of the Supreme
Court in 20th Century Finance Corporation v. State of Maharashtra (supra), Mr.
Dastur submitted that the question before the Supreme Court was whether it was
competent for a state government to impose sales-tax on the transfer of the
right to use any goods for any purpose and further whether it was competent
for the state government to legislate on this subject. These questions have
nothing to do with the question that is to be decided in the present case. In
the cited judgment, the Supreme Court was not concerned with the pure concept
of sale as defined in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 but was concerned only with
"deemed sales" as per the definition in the state enactments. The "transfer of
the right to use" goods was deemed by the state enactments, by making
necessary amendments to the definition of the word "sale", to be a sale so
that the state government could impose sales tax on such transfer. In the
present case, according to Mr. Dastur, we are not concerned with any deemed
sale and our attempt is to find out whether the sale of the equipment took
place within or without India. It is only the pure concept of sale of goods
that is applicable for consideration and the statutory fiction of deeming a
transfer of certain rights over the goods as a sale has no relevance or
applicability. What is to be determined is whether in the classical sense
there was a sale of the equipment within or without India.

86.9. Thus according to Mr. Dastur, there was no accrual of income as per
Section 5(2) and 9(1) of the Income-tax Act, there was no business connection,
there was no operation in India and so no income was taxable in India.

87\. Having thus completed the arguments based on the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, Mr. Dastur proceeded to put forth his submissions based on the
DTAA between India and Sweden, which are in the alternative. In other words,
he submitted that if the arguments based on the provisions of the Income-tax
Act are not acceptable, then the arguments based on the applicability of the
DTAA would come up for consideration.

87.1. Before proceeding to put forth his detailed and elaborate submissions,
Mr. Dastur prefaced them by pointing out that the double tax treaties jointly
constitute a separate regime of taxation and that they should not be construed
as a proviso to the Income-tax Act or as an exemption provision. In his
submission, the burden is still on the A.O. under the double tax treaty and it
is for him to prove, even under the treaty, that a particular receipt is
taxable. It is only thereafter that the burden would shift to the assessee to
point out to any provision of the treaty under which the receipt does not
become taxable.

87.2. With the above preface, Mr. Dastur proceeded to put forth the following
submissions with reference to the double tax treaty between India and Sweden.
A copy of the entire Treaty is placed at page 83 onwards of the paper book No.
1. He briefly took us through the relevant clauses of the treaty which have an
impact on the controversy arising in the present appeals. He first referred to
Article 7 which speaks of business profits. Under this Article, the business
profits of the Swedish enterprise is taxable in India only if it has a PE in
India. The importance of having a PE is that even if a sale is completed in
India and is, therefore, taxable under the Income-tax Act, it can be taxed in
the hands of the Swedish enterprise only if it has a PE in India. Article 5.1
speaks of what a PE is. Broadly a PE is the fixed place where the business of
the Swedish enterprise is carried on. The Business should have been carried on
through the PE, and PE should be an identifiable place of business, the PE
should be a place available to the assessee as a matter of right and shall
always be at its disposal. It is for the income-tax department to establish
that the Swedish enterprise has a fixed place of business in India available
to it as a matter of right and is at its disposal and which thus amounts to a
PE. A mere averment that the Swedish enterprise has an associated enterprise
in India, without anything more, is not sufficient to establish that it is a
PE. Article 5.2, which defines PE is an inclusive definition and brings within
its fold various forms that a PE may take. However, the condition is that all
these forms or places that are said to be used as a PE must be that of the
assessee. Article 5.3 talks about an "installation PE" but here the condition
is that such installation should have been carried on for more than six months
continuously in order that the site of installation can be treated as an
Installation P.E. Article 5.4 describes what is not a PE. Article 5.6(a)
defines an "Agency PE". Mr. Dastur raised a preliminary objection as to the
applicability of this Article. He submitted that the grounds of appeal taken
by the Department refers only to the existence of a fixed place PE and not to
any other form of PE including an Agency PE and, therefore, it is not open to
the Department to urge before the Tribunal that the assessee had an Agency PE
in India. That would involve investigation into the facts which should not be
permitted at the stage of the Tribunal. Nonetheless he proceeded to submit
that the assessee did not even have an Agency PE in India as alleged by the
income-tax department. Referring to the department's claim that the assessee
did have an Agency PE in India, Mr. Dastur submitted that in order that ECI
may be construed as the Agency PE of the assessee (as contended by the
Department), the following conditions should be fulfilled by ECI:

(i) ECI must be acting for the assessee in India;

(ii) ECI must have authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the assessee;

(iii) ECI should habitually exercise the authority to conclude contracts; and

(iv) The mere authority to negotiate contracts on behalf of the assessee would
not amount to an authority to conclude contracts. The term "conclude"
according to Mr. Dastur means that the Agency PE should be authorized to take
independent decisions with regard to the business of the assessee.

87.3. Referring to page 64 of the Paper Book No. 1 (Marketing and Business
Promotion Agreement), Mr. Dastur pointed out that under this Agreement, ECI
cannot bind the assessee in any manner whatsoever and if that is so, it cannot
be said that ECI had the authority to conclude any contract in India for the
assessee. A person, who does not have authority to bind another, can never be
considered the agent of the latter. In this connection he pointed out that in
the written submissions filed by Mr. GC Sharma, the learned counsel for the
Department, it has been stated that the assessee's employees have come to
India to negotiate the contract. If it is the Department's case that it is the
employees of the assessee who had come to India to negotiate the contract, it
cannot be postulated that ECI was habitually exercising the authority to
conclude the contracts. Mr. Dastur also pointed out from the various terms of
the Marketing and Business Promotion Agreement that ECI had a very limited
authority to act on behalf of the assessee. He filed a list of persons who
actually signed the contracts with the ten cellular operators and pointed out
that neither the branch nor ECI had signed any of them.

87.4. Coming back to the double tax treaty, Mr. Dastur referred to Article
5.6, which says that Article 5.5 will not apply if the person who is alleged
to be the agent of the foreign enterprise in India is acting as an agent with
an independent status and in the ordinary course of his business. In other
words, if the person alleged to be the agent of the Swedish enterprise himself
is carrying on a business of acting as an agent in his own status, he cannot
be construed as an Agency PE merely because he also acts for the Swedish
enterprise in the course of his independent business. However, this is subject
to the condition that in the course of his business, the agent should not be
wholly and exclusively acting for the Swedish enterprise. In this connection,
Mr. Dastur drew our attention to the finding of the CIT(Appeals) that ECI is
financially dependent on the assessee and submitted that it must be shown
further that ECI also had the authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the
assessee under Article 5.5(a) and mere financial dependence on the assessee is
not sufficient to constitute ECI as the Agency PE. Assuming the worst
scenario, it was submitted that even if Article 5.5(a) is found to be
applicable and it is assumed for the sake of argument that the EFC/ECI had
signed the contracts in India, without admitting that there is any evidence to
show that the contracts were signed in India, what can be taxed ultimately is
only a small portion of income of the assessee attributable to the signing of
the agreements in India, which at best can only be 10% of the profits arising
from the Marketing and Business Promotion agreements applying the ratio of the
judgment of the Madras High Court in Annamalais Timber Trust & Co. v. CIT 41
ITR 781).

87.5. Mr. Dastur then took us through the relevant case law and the views of
learned authors expressed in their treatises about the applicability of double
tax treaties. We may notice them very briefly. The first decision is that of
CIT v. Vishakhapatnam Port Trust (144 ITR 146), a judgment of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in which it has been held that PE postulates the existence
of a substantial element of an enduring or permanent nature of a foreign
enterprise in another country which can be attributed to a fixed place of
business in that country. It should be of such a nature that it would amount
to a virtual projection of the foreign enterprise of one country into the soil
of another country. In connection with Article 5.1 of the DTAA with Sweden,
Mr. Dastur referred to the OECD Convention, extracts from which were filed in
the case law paper book. The commentary says that in order to constitute a
fixed place PE, there should be a distinct situs "in India" and that the word
"fixed" refers to a distinct place with a certain degree of permanence. It
further says that the foreign enterprise should be able to walk into the place
of its own right and not by permission. In this connection, Mr. Dastur pointed
out that the fact that the assessee's employees from Sweden at times sat in
the office of the ECI, while in India, does not satisfy this condition,
namely, that they should be able to walk in and use the premises of their own
right and not by permission. The permission of ECI would have been necessary
for the assessee's employees to use the premises of ECI and that does not
constitute a fixed place PE of the assessee. The burden was on the Department
to show the existence of a right on the part of the assessee to use the
premises whenever it wished and for whatever duration, which has not been
discharged in this case.

87.6. Reference was made to certain portions of Phillip Bakers book on
International Double Taxation Treaties where he has expressed the view that in
determining the existence of a PE, it must be ensured that the enterprise has
a right to occupy the premises though it may not either own the premises or
have taken it on rent. Thus the crucial question for determining the PE is
whether the premises could be occupied as of right. Mr. Dastur submitted that
the CIT(A) in the present case has recorded a finding to the effect that the
assessee has no fixed place of business with a right to use the same and in
the light of this finding and the view of the learned author, the assessee
cannot be considered to have a PE in India.

87.7. With regard to Article 5.5 of the double tax treaty with Sweden, Mr.
Dastur drew our attention to Klaus Vogel's classic Treatise on the Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreements where the author has expressed his view with
regard to the determination of the existence of Agency PE. He cited the ruling
of the Authority for Advance Ruling (AAR) in TVM Ltd. v. CIT (237 ITR 230) in
which the Authority has ruled that what is essential in be ascertained, in
determining whether there is an Agency PE or not, is to examine what has been
actually done by the entity which is alleged to be the Agency PE and that one
should not be bound by what is written in the agreement between the parties.
Reference was made also to the order of the Calcutta Bench of the Tribunal in
Graphite India Ltd. (86 ITD 384 at page 396) wherein a view has been expressed
that in interpreting the DTAA, OECD Model is relevant and should be looked
into and if the OECD Model of the Treaty is adopted in the Treaty which falls
for interpretation without change, the Commentary on OECD Model is normally to
be followed.

87.8. Our attention was also drawn to Article 5.7 of the double tax treaty
which says that subsidiary companies of the foreign enterprise do not
automatically become a PE in India. This was with reference to the possible
argument that ECI which is another subsidiary of LME of which the assessee
company is also a subsidiary, could be construed as a PE in India of the
assessee. Though the Article speaks of a direct subsidiary of the foreign
enterprise and not to a subsidiary of the holding company of the foreign
enterprise, this argument was addressed by way of an answer to the possible
argument.

87.9. Turning to the order of the CIT(A), Mr. Dastur assailed the conclusion
of the CIT(Appeals) that since the supply contract was entered into in India,
income accrues to the assessee in India within the meaning of Section 5(2)(b)
and Section 9(1) of the I.T.Act. He referred to the detailed written
submissions filed by the assessee before the CIT(Appeals), a copy of which is
placed at page 36 of Paper Book No. 2, in which the assessee has challenged
the incorrect facts and assumptions made by the AO in connection with the
existence of a fixed PE of the assessee in India. He submitted that the
ultimate decision of the AO that the assessee has a fixed PE in India is also
a mere assumption not based on any facts, which has been rightly over-turned
by the CIT(A).

88\. Turning now to the question of permanent establishment and the findings
of the CIT(A) and the arguments of Mr. G.C. Sharma, learned Sr. counsel for
the Department, Mr. Dastur strongly relied on the findings of the CIT(A) in
paragraphs 8.1 and 8.3 to 8.6 of his order and submitted that no arguments
were advanced by Mr. Sharma against those findings and, therefore, they must
be taken as correct. He also submitted that all the findings of the CIT(A)
were based on evidence and facts and so long as no material is produced on
behalf of the Department to disturb those findings, the ultimate conclusion of
the CIT(A) that the assessee did not have a fixed place PE in India, shall not
be disturbed. With this preface, Mr. Dastur proceeded to refer to some of the
authorities strongly relied on by Mr. Sharma to demonstrate how those
authorities do not apply to the facts of the present case. We shall make a
brief reference to these arguments.

88.1. The first decision strongly relied on by Mr. Sharma with reference to
the question of PE was that of the AAR in Advance Ruling A.No. 8 of 1995, In
re (223 ITR 416). Mr. Dastur submitted that the facts of this case were
different from the facts of the present case. In the cited case, the
subsidiary of the foreign enterprise had no independent business activities
but it was set up only to aid the Swiss company and hence practically it was a
branch of the foreign enterprise. In the present case, ECI acted as an
independent contractor and was not dependent in any manner upon the Swedish
company (i.e. the assessee). The ECI, which is the installation company in the
present case, was doing the installation work independently without any
connection with the assessee and the profits derived therefrom had been also
taxed in its hands separately. Thus it cannot be said that ECI is a PE of the
assessee on the strength of the cited judgment.

88.2. Sutron Corporation v. Director of Income-tax (138 Taxman 87) (AAR) was a
case cited by Mr. Sharma. In that case the AAR recorded a finding that there
is a fixed place PE of the foreign enterprise in India. This finding was
recorded on the basis of certain facts. In the present case, there are no such
facts, according to Mr. Dastur, as would lead to a similar conclusion. There
are also no facts to establish a business connection between the assessee and
ECI so that it can be said that ECI is carrying out some of the business
activities of the assessee in India and could hence be described as a fixed
place PE of the assessee.

88.3. Mr. Dastur then took up for consideration the judgment of the Italian
Court of Cassation, a copy of which has been placed at page 55 of the case law
paper book filed by Mr. G.C. Sharma. He pointed out that whatever has been
observed by the court in connection with Clause 5.5 of the Italian - German
DTAA already exists in Clause 5.6 of the Indo-Sweden DTAA and the question for
consideration would be whether this clause of the Indo-Sweden Agreement is
applicable to the present case and that the conditions mentioned therein have
been satisfied. It was thus contended that a mere reference; to the Italian
judgment would not advance the case of the revenue and that it is further
required to be factually established that the conditions necessary for
applying Clause 5.6 of the Indo-Sweden DTAA are present. This exercise, it was
contended, has not been done by the Department. Referring to the written
submissions filed by Mr. Sharma titled "Ericsson" in which submissions have
been made on the basis of the Italian Court's decision vis-a-vis group PE, Mr.
Dastur submitted that whatever has been claimed in the written submissions are
only abstract propositions and not based on any facts. Such abstract
propositions, about which nobody can have any quarrel, amounts to putting the
cart before the horse, according to Mr. Dastur.

88.4. Mr. Dastur further drew our attention to paragraph 24 of the OECD
Commentary, a copy of which is placed at page 109 of paper book No. 1 and read
out the relevant portions thereof. He also drew our attention to paragraph 33
of the OECD Commentary which is at page 111 of the said paper book wherein it
has been mentioned that it is necessary for the revenue to establish that the
enterprise in one state had expressly given authority to the entity in the
other state to conclude contracts on its behalf and unless this is present,
the entity in the other state, in which the income is alleged to arise, cannot
be considered as the Agency PE. According to Mr. Dastur, in view of the
authoritative OECD Commentary, which is frequently referred to in judgments
and orders relating to controversies arising regarding the interpretation of
double tax treaties, the judgment of the Italian Court of Cassation does not
assist the revenue in the present case and is totally irrelevant and out of
context.

89\. Mr. Dastur next invited our attention to the detailed reply filed by the
assessee before the CIT(Appeals), a copy of which is at page 34 onwards of
paper book No. 2. According to him this reply is a compendious one dealing
with all aspects of the matter as below:

    
    
      i)   Upto page 43            - Deals with Software,
    ii)  Upto pages 44 to 50     - Deal with permanent establishment,
    iii) Upto pages 51 to 62     - Accrual of income and Section 9(1),
    iv)  Pages 63 to 69          - Quantum of profit,
    v)   Pages 70 to 87          - Software payments,
    vi)  Pages 88 to 90          - Charge of interest Under Section 234B and 234C.
    vii) Pages 91 to 95          - Section 142(1) notice.
     
    
    89.1. Mr. Dastur also filed a "Note" which in brief pointed out the mistakes or incorrect statements or observations said to have been made by Mr. G.C. Sharma in his statement filed titled "Ericsson Radio System's case".
     
    
    90. With regard to the quantum of income assessed, Mr. Dastur referred to page 4 of paper book No. 1 where the percentages are referred to and explained before us, how the application of 21% to determine the income of the assessee is arbitrary. He referred to Rule 10(ii) of the Income-tax Rules and submitted that the profit under this provision may be arrived at by the following formula:
      World Profit X    Indian Profit
                     Indian sales
     
    
    He further submitted that while applying the rule, the provisions of Section 44C are not to be applied.
     
    
    

90.1 Mr. Dastur referred to the Circular No. 23 dated 23.7.1969 (pages 82a to
82d of the paper book No. 1). It says that in the assessment of profits
occurring through an agency PE, allowance shall be made for the expenses
incurred, including the agent's commission in making the sales. If the
commission fully represents the value of the profit attributable to the
agent's services, it should prima facie extinguish the assessment. Based on
this circular, it was contended that even if 10% is assessed as profits
arising to the assessee for signing contracts in India, on the basis of the
judgment of the Madras High Court in Annamalai's Timber Trust (supra), the ECI
having been paid commission of 18%, the assessment would get extinguished.

91\. Before concluding his arguments on this issue, Mr. Dastur submitted that
the case of Ericsson arises out of the facts which are different from the
facts in the case of Motorola, which was also heard by the Special Bench and,
therefore, the broad claim of Mr. G.C. Sharma that his arguments in the case
of Motorola on this issue may be adopted in the case of Ericsson also, should
not be accepted, especially in the absence of anything to show specific
instances of similarity between the two cases.

92\. Mr. G.C. Sharma, learned counsel for the Income-tax Department in his
rejoinder to the arguments of Mr. Dastur in the appeal filed by the
Department, submitted with regard to the preliminary objection raised by Mr.
Dastur against ground No. 1 not raising the question as to whether the
contract for installation can be interpreted as a works contract and,
therefore, it is not open to the Department to make submissions on this
aspect, contended that the ground of appeal No. 1 may be read in a modified
form to omit reference to Clauses (i) and (ii) of the ground. He further
submitted that if the reference to these clauses are omitted then the ground
will be all pervasive in nature and it would be open to the revenue to raise
the question that the contract is a works contract. This submission was not
very seriously contested by Mr. Dastur and, therefore, we have permitted Mr.
G.C. Sharma to address arguments on all aspects of the matter, more so having
regard to the importance of the issue and the submission of Mr. Dastur that he
would also make submissions contesting on merits this point made by Mr. G.C.
Sharma, though not formally raised in the ground.

93\. In the above background we may proceed to note the submissions made by
Mr. Sharma. He first submitted that it is of significance that all the
contracts were signed in Bangalore and on the same day i.e. 2 July, 1996 and
this is a pointer to the fact that the installation contract and the supply
contract have necessarily to be read together. He drew our attention to Clause
(1) of the supply contract and pointed out that the word used there was
"contractor" and posed a question as to why the word "supplier" was not used,
which should have been the normal course, if it was merely a supply contract.
He also pointed out that the "installation contract" referred to in the supply
contract was also entered into on the same day. The word "site" appearing in
the supply contract refers to the installation contract. His attempt was thus
to show that all the contracts are integrated and have to be read together. He
further pointed out that in all the contracts the common word used was
"system" which means both the hardware and the software. Thus there are cross
references between the supply contract and the installation contract and one
has to be necessarily read with the other. He also drew our attention to the
scope of the contract which refers to the system being installed on a turn key
basis which means that the entire project is a turn key project. According to
Mr. Sharma a turn key project cannot be disintegrated into a supply contract
and installation contract and both have to be treated as an integrated whole.
He also pointed out that under the contract the amount was not payable
immediately and the payment was linked with the progress of the work. If the
price is linked with the progress of the work, it is a clear pointer to the
fact that it is a works contract or a turn key project. There was also
reference to "interface" in the supply contract at many places, which meant
that there has to be a connection between the supply, and the installation
contracts. Clause 17 of the supply contract referred to "project" which again
meant the whole contract including the installation. Clause 18.1 stated that
the acceptance test shall be done by the installation contractor. According to
Mr. Sharma the reference in the supply contract to the acceptance test being
done by the installation contractor clearly established the close nexus
between the supply and installation agreements and proved clinchingly that
both are one and the same, divided only for purposes of income-tax.

94\. Mr. Sharma thereafter referred to the installation contract and submitted
that this was also entered into on 2.7.1996, the same day as the supply
contract. The preamble to the installation contract referred to the hardware
and software "belonging" to JTM. The question posed by Mr. Sharma was that on
the very day the contract was entered into, it cannot be said that either the
hardware or the software belonged to JTM. According to him this showed that
the hardware and software were owned by JTM on 2.7.1996 itself which again was
a pointer to the integrated nature of the two contracts. Mr. Sharma further
pointed out that in the installation contract as well as in the supply
contract, most of the definitions are common and identical. The scope of the
installation contract (Clause 5) also referred to the turnkey basis of the
contract as in the case of the supply contract. The effective date of the
installation contract was made dependent on the progress of the work which
again was similar to the supply contract where the price was not payable
immediately but was to be paid on the basis of the progress of the work. Even
the responsibility matrix referred to in the installation contract is the same
as in the supply contract. In short, Mr. Sharma's attempt was to point out
that all the important definitions and clauses in both the contracts were
substantially the same, which fortified his argument that both the contracts
are one integrated whole.

95\. Mr. Sharma then referred to the overall agreement which was also entered
into on the same day as the supply and installation contracts i.e. on 2.7.1996
and at the same place, namely, Bangalore. The only argument raised by Mr.
Sharma on the basis of the overall agreement was that this also has to be read
along with the supply and installation contracts since they were all entered
into on the same day and at the same place, showing clearly the intention of
the parties themselves to treat all the three aspects of the work as an
integrated whole or as a turn key project.

96\. Referring to the marketing and business promotion agreement Mr. Sharma
made a brief submission that this took in the rendering of services by way of
promoting sales but agreed that it was not for concluding the sales as the
Indian company (ECI) did not have the authority under this agreement to
conclude the sales on behalf of the assessee.

97\. Mr. Sharma thereafter contended that if all the three contracts are to be
treated as one integrated whole or as referring to a turn key project, the
question would arise as to where did the income therefrom accrue. According to
him the income accrued in India because of two reasons: (i) the works were
executed in India and (ii) the contracts were all signed in India. In support
of this plea he strongly relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court, in the
case of 20th Century Finance Corpn. (supra) and reiterated his submission that
the place of execution of the contracts determined the situs of the sale and
consequently the place of accrual of the income.

98\. Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for the department, next submitted that
there was a business connection in this case and nothing but the business
connection as indicated by all the agreements. He explained that the business
connection is also established by the fact that the consumer in India, when he
uses the cell phone, the call is routed through the cell operator and the cell
operator has a close connection with the assessee in the sense that it is the
assessee who provides the income to the cell operator by allowing the cell
operator to use the system for the purpose of facilitating the calls. Thus the
connection between the assessee and the consumer, through the cell operator,
is established. This, according to Mr. Sharma, is a business connection within
the meaning of Section 9(1)(i) of the I.T. Act. He further explained that by
this connection, the installation or the marketing company does not earn any
income on regular basis and, therefore, the revenue has treated their income
separately and assessed in the respective hands. So what the revenue is
seeking is only to tax the income arising from the supply contract.

99\. Mr. Sharma's next argument was with reference to the operations carried
out in India by the assessee under all the three contracts. The first
operation was to conduct a network survey in India. Secondly, the act of
signing the contracts in India also amounts to an operation in India. Thirdly,
the assessee undertook overall responsibility for the successful
implementation of the project which was to be executed in India. Fourthly, the
assessee stood guarantee for the due performance of all the three contracts
under the overall agreement. Fifthly, the assessee appointed agents for
marketing the products in India whose remuneration depended on sales. Lastly,
the situs of the sale, as already explained earlier, was in India. Since all
these operations were in India, the profits attributable thereto were
assessable in India Under Section 9(1)(i), Explanation (a), which says that
the income of the business deemed to accrue or arise in India shall be that
part of the income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out
in India.

100\. Mr. Sharma thereafter proceeded to distinguish the five judgments which
were heavily relied upon by Mr. Dastur, the learned counsel for Ericsson. The
first judgment is the case of Annamalai Timber Trust & Co. (41 ITR 781) (Mad).
He pointed out that in that case there was a simple contract and, therefore,
the High Court upheld the Tribunal's conclusion that 10% of the income may be
attributable to the signing of the contract in India, considering the signing
in India to be an operation carried out in India. However, in the present case
it is not a simple contract as in the cited case but there are number of
contracts and complex operations are to be performed in India and, therefore,
a simple 10% of the income cannot be attributed to the business operations in
India.

100.1. The second case cited by the assessee was Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. A.P.
(supra). He submitted that the facts in this decision were completely
different from the facts of the present case.

100.2. As regards the judgment of the A.P. High Court in Bharat Heavy Plate &
Vessels Ltd. (supra), Mr. Sharma submitted that this case is of no assistance
to the assessee but on the contrary assisted the revenue on the point of
business connection.

100.3. As regards CIT v. Energomach Exports (supra), a judgment of the
Karnataka High Court cited on behalf of the assessee, Mr. Sharma submitted
that unlike in the cited case, in the present case, the assessee is interested
in the installation contract as well as in the companies to whom installation
and marketing contracts were given and, therefore, there is business
connection.

100.4. With regard to Dy. CIT v. Alcatel (supra), which is an order of the
Delhi Bench of the Tribunal, it was submitted that the decision is based on
the fact that all the agreements in that case were separate and distinct,
whereas in the present case they are to be read with each other as one
integrated whole and if so read the ratio of the order will not be applicable.
He further pointed out that the decision of the Delhi Bench was based on two
concessions made on behalf of the assessee and further as para 41 of the said
order shows, the question largely depended on the nature of the operations
that were carried out in India. In the present case, however, according to Mr.
Sharma since all the operations are carried out in India, the ratio of the
order of the Delhi Bench is not applicable.

100.5. With reference to the other cases cited on behalf of the assessee Mr.
Sharma submitted that he need not discuss them as none of them matches the
colour of the assessee's case.

101\. Mr. Sharma thereafter contended that there was a permanent establishment
of the assessee (Ericsson) in India. In this connection, he heavily relied on
the findings recorded by the A.O. and also his own written submissions on this
issue. He broadly stated that the assessee, sitting in Sweden, could not have
possibly carried out all its activities in India and discharged the overall
responsibility under the overall contract unless it had a permanent
establishment in India. He submitted that one has to look at the probabilities
of the case also, as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Durga
Prasad More (82 ITR 540), the probability in this case being that unless there
is a permanent establishment in India, the assessee could not have discharged
its overall responsibility under the agreements.

102\. Mr. Sharma thereafter proceeded to address the issue of the computation
of income or the attribution of income to the PE. He referred to the findings
recorded by the A.O. in paras 78 and 79 of the assessment order. He pointed
out that the assessee has not filed any working of the profits attributable to
the PE. He also pointed out that the A.O. has only computed the profits
arising out of Indian operations which were an unsatisfactory exercise
undertaken by him. In the submission of Mr. Sharma, the question of
attribution of income to the PE can be restored to the A.O. by laying down
certain guiding principles as to how the income of the PE should be attributed
with particular reference to the CBDT Circular No. 23 dated 23.7.1969. Mr.
Sharma submitted that it is not applicable to the present case because (i)
there was no agent in India, and (ii) the contracts were signed in India. As
regards the CBDT Instruction No. 1829 dated 21.9.1989, he submitted that this
was also not applicable to the present case because (a) the instruction
applies only to power projects, (b) the instruction is only an administrative
act of the income-tax department and (c) the A.O. is not bound by it.

DECISION

103\. We have very carefully considered the questions of "business connection"
and "permanent establishment". The assessee company is incorporated in Sweden
and is a 100% subsidiary of Telefonaktiebolaget L.M. Ericsson (LME for short).
It is one of the leading suppliers of telecommunication equipment comprising
of both, hardware and software. There is another company by the name Ericsson
Telephone Corporation India AB, also incorporated in Sweden and a subsidiary
of LME. It has a branch in India and for short, this company will be referred
to as EFC. There is a third company by the name of Ericsson Communication Ltd.
(ECI for short) and this was incorporated in India.

104\. The assessee company had entered into agreements with ten cellular
operators in India for supply of hardware and software during the relevant
year, hereinafter referred to as the Supply Contract. EFC had entered into
installation contracts with the various cellular operators. These contracts
remained with EFC for a period of three months upto June, 1996. Subsequently,
on the incorporation of ECI, these contracts were assigned to ECI from July
1996 onwards. The Assessing Officer was of the view that the income of the
assessee was taxable in India, both, under the Income-tax Act, 1961 as well as
under the treaty between India and Sweden. His reasons for coming to this
conclusion can be summarized as follows:

(i) Before the contract was signed in India, a number of employees of the
assessee company and of associate companies visited India to do the network
survey and to negotiate the terms of contract,

(ii) The contracts were signed in India and the supplier (assessee) was
responsible for the delivery till the port in India.

(iii) The assessee has a dependent agent PE in the form of EFC and ECI.

(iv) The assessee has a fixed place of business in the form of a branch as
well as in the form of ECI.

EFC was held to be a dependant agent PE on the ground that (a) the overall
contract clearly established the full responsibility of the assessee for
supply, erection and after sales services which was signed in Bangalore on
2.7.1996; (b) the installation contract and supply contract were signed on the
same day; (c) EFC had neither the infrastructure nor the expertise to do the
installation work and hence, the technical expertise was provided by the
assessee or by LME; (d) EFC was economically dependent on the assessee company
in so far as that the share capital had been invested by the parent company of
the assessee company and that it had earned revenues from the companies to
whom supplies were made by the assessee company; (e) the expatriates who came
to India used the premises of EFC and also other infrastructural facilities;
(f) a perusal of the contract entered into by the assessee showed that the
assessee had taken the responsibility of installation also. Almost the same
reasons were assigned for holding ECI also a dependent agency PE of the
assessee. The Assessing Officer held the acceptance test certificate as the
most important document which had to be signed by the representative of the
assessee also. Further, according to the Assessing Officer, the assessee
itself had told the various customers that it had a full fledged presence in
India and such a presence, according to the Assessing Officer, was not
possible without a fixed place of business. This was substantiated by the fact
that the contracts were signed in India, the responsibility to supply the
equipment upto the ports in India, replacement of defective parts, guarantee
of successful completion of installation work etc. were of the assessee and
henceit had a fixed place PE in India. The assessee tried to meet all the
contentions of the Assessing Officer without any success.

105\. The CIT (Appeals) considered the elaborate submissions of the assessee
and discussed the issues at length. He observed that all the agreements were
entered into India and were to be governed by Indian laws. After considering
the various clauses of the agreements, he observed that it was not a case of
single sale or not a case of a series of unconnected sales. The agreement was
to put in place the GSM system for the use of the cellular operators. The
agreement took into account that contractors will install the equipment and
software and their tests will determine the acceptability or otherwise of the
supplies made by the assessee for setting up GSM system. In fact, according to
the CIT (Appeals), admittedly, the acceptance test was a milestone for
payments in so far as that the payments were to start after the acceptance
test. The CIT (Appeals) further observed that the Installation Contract was
inextricably linked with the supply contract in so much so that the tests
carried out by the contractor were binding on the assessee. Only they were to
be carried out by two separate persons who were in full knowledge of the work
to be performed by either of them. Based on these facts, coupled with the fact
that the supply agreement was preceded by network survey, planning and
marketing, client discussions and succeeded by monitoring of the supplies,
client discussions and control of accounts receivable, the CIT (Appeals) held
that income accrued and arose in India under Sections 5 and 9 of the Act. He
distinguished the cases of Mahabir Commercial Co. (86 ITR 417) and DCIT v.
Alcatel (47 ITD 275). However, in arriving at the conclusion that income
accrued in India, the CIT (Appeals) heavily relied on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of 20th Century Finance Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v.
State of Maharashtra (119 STC 182). Relying on this judgment, the CIT
(Appeals) observed that the situs of sale has to be determined on a number of
factors including the formation of contract and acts done under the contract.
According to him the situs of sale would be the place where the property in
goods passes, i.e. where written agreement transferring the right to use is
executed.

106\. In view of the above findings, the CIT(Appeals) was of the view that the
issue regarding applicability of Section 9(1)(i) need not be decided. However,
since the issue was raised before him, he proceeded to examine whether the
assessee had any business connection in India or not. He held the following
cases to be inapplicable to the facts of the present case:

(1) CIT v. R.D. Agarwal & Co. 56 ITR 20 (SC) (2) Carborandum Co. v. CIT \- 108
ITR 335 (SC), (3) VDO Techometer Werke West Germany v. CIT 117 ITR 804 (SC),
(4) CIT v. Toshoku Ltd. - 125 ITR 525 (SC), (5) CIT v. Gulf Oil (Great
Britain) Ltd. - 108 ITR 174 (Bom.) While rejecting the applicability of the
above judgments, the CIT (Appeals) observed that in the present case, the
assessee had signed agreements in India with the installers and cellular
operators in India for setting up the GSM system in India for the latter,
prior to which a number of activities had been carried out in India, the
contractors worked for the promotion of assessee's equipment in India,
assessee's employees came to India for long stays, the contractor's activities
were wholly devoted to the business of the assessee, and therefore, the
assessee had business connection in India, through and from which income is
deemed to accrue or arise to it.

107\. With regard to the issue whether the assessee had a PE in India, the CIT
(Appeals) observed that it cannot be said that various concerns were formed
purely with a view to avoid or evade tax in India. They were not mere paper
companies having no business purpose in. India and hence, the assessee and the
contractors were held to be separate persons and that the office of the
contractors cannot be taken to be the office of the assessee, particularly in
view of the fact that the Assessing Officer was not able to specify as to
which and how many employees of the assessee stayed in India for full year and
used the contractor's office for conducting assessee's business. Thus, it was
held that the assessee had no fixed place PE in India. The CIT (Appeals) also
held that the installation projects cannot constitute a PE for the assessee in
view of: (a) Board's Circular No. 1829 with regard to power projects, and (b)
the contractors had been assessed separately on the income earned by them. The
CIT (Appeals) further held that the contractors had no authority to conclude
any contract on behalf of the assessee, and hence they did not constitute a
dependent PE also. In the final analysis, the CIT (Appeals) held that the
assessee did not have any PE in India, the necessary consequence of which was
that the assessee was liable to tax on its business profits in Sweden and not
in India.

108\. In conclusion, the CIT (Appeals) held that:

(a) the assessee had a business connection in India and hence, income accrued
to it in India;

(b) however, since the assessee had no permanent establishment in India under
Article 5 of the DTAA between India and Sweden, its business income of Rs.
33,99,69,471 was not taxable in India.

109\. Section 5 of the Act describes the scope of total income, Sub-section
(2) of Section 5 provides that in case of a non-resident, the total income
will include-

(a) all income which is received or is deemed to be received in India; or

(b) all income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to him
in India.

110\. Section 9 of the act provides for the incomes which shall be deemed to
accrue or arise in India. The Assessing Officer and the CIT (Appeals) held
that income was deemed to have accrued to the assessee in India on account of
business connection in India, and therefore, we straight go to Section 9(1)(i)
of the Act.

111\. The main contention of the CIT (Appeals) and the learned counsel for the
revenue is that all the contracts were integrated into each other and since
they all were executed in India, income is deemed to have accrued in India. In
this connection, heavy reliance has been placed on the judgment in the case of
both Century Finance Corpn. Ltd. (supra). Hence, it would be advantageous, at
the outset, to consider the said judgment. In this case, the Supreme Court was
concerned with the power of State Legislatures to levy sales tax on the
transfer of right to use (underline by us) and goods envisaged under Clause
(29A)(d) of the Article 366 of the Constitution on the premise that goods put
to use are located within their States. The brief facts leading to this
controversy were that the petitioners carried on business of leasing diverse
equipments. According to them, they entered into Master Lease Agreements with
the lessee. The Master Lease Agreement provided that orders for individual
equipment will be placed by the petitioners at the instance of lessees and
that the equipment to be leased will be dispatched by the manufacturers or
supplier concerned to the locations specified in the lease. The petitioners
disbursed the value of equipment to the suppliers and, at the instance of the
petitioners, the suppliers delivered the equipment to the lessees at the
specified locations for use. According to the petitioners, one transaction of
transfer of right to use goods was subjected to sales tax by more than one
State. Some states levied tax on the petitioners, merely because the goods
were found to be located in their States at the time of execution of contract
which had taken place outside the State. Some States levied tax when the goods
were delivered in their States for use in pursuance of agreement of transfer
executed outside their States and some States taxed such transactions of
deemed sales on the premise that agreements for transfer of right to use had
been executed within their States. The questions, therefore, that arose for
consideration of the Court were, whether a State can levy sales tax on
transfer of right to use goods merely on the basis that the goods put to use
were located within its State irrespective of the facts that - (a) the
contract of transfer of right to use had been executed outside the State; (b)
sale had taken place in the course of an inter-state trade; and (c) sales were
in the course of export or import into the territory of India.

112\. While dealing with the above questions, the court took note, in para 21
of its judgment, of the fact that they were not dealing with actual sales but
were dealing with deemed sales as mentioned in Clause (29A) of Article 366. It
also took note of the fact that the situs of sale could only be fixed either
by the appropriate Legislature or by judge made law, and that there were no
settled principles for determining the situs of sale. Further, the court was
conscious of the fact that it was concerned with the deemed sales as mentioned
in Sub-clause (d) of Clause (29A) of Article 366, i.e. on the transfer of the
right to use any goods for any purpose. Thus, keeping in view the fact that
they were dealing with deemed sales in the form of leasing transactions
wherein the events in the entire chain took place in several States, and the
fact that these several States had sought to levy sales-tax on the basis of
one of the events taking place within the State, the Supreme Court proceeded
to resolve the controversy as to which State is entitled to levy tax. Since
the Court was in search of the taxable event on the transfer of right to use
the goods, it opined that the transfer of right was sine qua non for the right
to use any goods. Thus, the situs of taxable events was held to be the
agreement which legally transferred the right to use goods. In other words, if
the goods were available irrespective of the fact where the goods were located
and a written contract was entered into between the parties, the taxable event
on such a deemed sale would be the execution of the contract for the transfer
of right to use goods. But in case of an oral or implied transfer of the right
to use goods it may be effected by the delivery of the goods.

113\. As contrasted with the above, in the present case, we are not concerned
with:

(1) the powers of the States, under the Constitution, to levy sales-tax;

(2) deemed sales;

(3) leasing transaction where the events in the entire chain took place in
various states.

In the present case, we are concerned with actual sales and the accrual of the
income therefrom. Viewed in the above backdrop, the judgment in the case of
20th Century Finance Corpn. (supra) cannot help the revenue and cannot help us
also to resolve the controversy which is before us. Consequently, the repeated
emphasis of the CIT (Appeals) that income accrued in India because the
contracts were signed in India, cannot be accepted because this conclusion is
based on a judgment (20th Century Finance Corpn.) which has no applicability
to the facts of the case. As a matter of fact, the issue will have to be
approached on the basis of the provisions of Sale of Goods Act to which we
shall advert a little later. Before that it would be pertinent to deal with
the works contract theory put forward by Mr. Sharma on behalf of the revenue.
In connection with this argument, Mr. Sharma heavily relied on the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (supra).

114\. In this case, the assessee was engaged in building ships for different
ship owners under orders placed by them. The assessee was claiming it to be a
works contract and not a contract for sale, thereby claiming exemption from
sales tax under the Andhra Pradesh General Sales-tax Act, 1957. One of the
clauses in the contract deed provided that the property in the vessel was to
pass to the buyer with the payment of the first installment of price. However,
the Supreme Court observed that one is not to be guided by the face value of
the language employed; one has to ascertain the intention of the parties. The
Court took note of a clause in the contract whereby the insurance cover was to
be obtained by the builder, the policy or policies being taken out in the
joint names of the builder and the owner. A pertinent thing noted by the Court
was that the loss or damage, if any, occasioned to the vessel before delivery
to the owner was to be suffered by the builder which would not have been so if
the property in the vessel had already stood passed to the owner. Thus, it was
held that for all practical purposes the property in the vessel continued to
remain with the builder and passed to the owner only (i) on satisfactory
completion of the work, (ii) on the vessel coming into existence in a
deliverable state, and (iii) satisfaction of the owner as to the vessel being
seaworthy and also having been built up to the satisfaction of the owner in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. The Court held that
it was not the meaning of an individual recital or the inference flowing from
any term or condition of the contract read in isolation but an overview of the
contract wherefrom the nature of the transaction covered thereby has to be
determined.

115\. Based on the above observations of the Supreme Court, it was the
contention of Mr. Sharma that the cellular operators were not interested
merely in buying the equipment, but the ultimate aim was to see that the
equipment was properly installed and that it worked satisfactorily. To see
that it worked satisfactorily, it was the responsibility of the assessee as
per the overall agreement and hence, as mentioned by the CIT (Appeals),
acceptance test was the milestone on reaching which, payment was to be made to
the supplier, i.e. the assessee. In this sense, it was contended by Mr. Sharma
that all the contracts were integrated, on the whole it was a works contract
and hence the situs of the sale was where the contract was executed, which in
this case was India. It is quite ironical that the revenue, in order to prove
that the contract in the present case was a works contract, has relied on the
judgment in which the claim of the assessee that it was a works contract, was
negatived by the Court. Be that as it may, we appreciate the purport of Mr.
Sharma's argument that it is the real intention of the parties which matters
and not mere recitals in the agreement. Sections 18 to 24 of the Sale of Goods
Act (SOG Act for short) contain rules for ascertaining the intention of the
parties in this regard. Let us examine them.

116\. Section 18 of the SOG Act provides that no property in the goods is
transferred to the buyer unless and until this goods are ascertained. It is
nobody's case here that the goods in question were unascertained goods.
Section 19(1) of the SOG Act provides that in case of specific or ascertained
goods, the property in them is transferred to the buyer at such time as the
parties to the contract intend it to be transferred. Section 19(2) provides
that for the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties regard shall
be had to the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the
circumstances of the case. Section 19(3) provides that unless a different
intention appears, the rules contained in Sections 20 to 24 are rules for
ascertaining the intention of the parties as to the time at which the property
in the goods is to pass to the buyer. We now proceed to examine the contracts
in the present case in the light of these provisions.

117\. The supply contract is entered into between the assessee and the
cellular operator (JT Mobiles is taken as an illustrative case). The
installation contract is entered into between JT Mobiles and 'EFC' which is
the branch of another Swedish company but belongs to the LME group, i.e. the
same group to which the assessee company belongs. The preamble to the supply
contract gives expression to the willingness of the parties to sell and buy
the GSM equipment, comprising of the hardware and licensing of application
software. Likewise, the preamble to the installation contract expresses the
desire of JT Mobiles to avail the services of the installation contractor to
install the GSM equipment belonging to it and the installation contractor
expresses the desire to provide its services to JT Mobiles. Nothing turns on
this. Clause 5 in both the agreements spell out the scope of the respective
contracts. Much had been said on behalf of the revenue that though the
supplier has apparently only supplied the system, but the same has been
supplied on a turn-key basis. The argument therefore, was that the supplier
was also involved and interested in the installation and hence the agreements
have to be construed in an integrated manner to mean a works contract.
Interestingly, in both the agreements, thword 'turn-key' has been used. In
other words, the supply contractor is to deliver the system on turn-key basis
and the installation contractor is to install the system on turn-key basis. It
is commonly known that any turn-key project would involve:

(i) planning and design, (ii) supply of permanent equipment, (iii) civil works
and (iv) installation, testing and commissioning of the equipment. It is not
uncommon that in execution of such large projects, the above work may be
handled by a consortium of companies and for that matter, separate agreements
will have to be entered into to carry out each of the works described above.
Under each agreement, each contractor will be responsible for his part of the
job. But obviously, each contractor will be interested in the successful
implementation of the entire project. Certain projects are so specialized that
the main equipment for it are not available off the shelf. They may have to be
tailor-made for the customer, but the one who makes the equipment would
obviously be interested to see that it is ultimately commissioned to the
satisfaction of everyone. It is in this sense, that the word 'turn-key' is
used in both the agreements, albeit loosely. But there is no reason to
conclude that all agreements should be construed as one to regard it as a
works contract.

118\. Then, the price payable under each agreement, terms of payment and
performance guarantee to be provided, by each contractor are according to
their respective responsibilities under the agreement. As per Clause 12 of the
Installation Contract, it is the responsibility of the installation contractor
to perform the installation. The supply contractor is in no way connected with
the installation plan. JT Mobiles' undertakings under both the agreements are
materially different. We are told that the Project Manager under the
Installation Contract is to be at the site of installation. Supply Contract
provides that Acceptance Test shall be carried out by the Installation
Contractor in accordance with the terms and conditions stipulated in the
installation contract. The Supply Contract, of course, also provides that the
acceptance test carried out by the Installation Contractor shall be binding on
the Supply Contractor. However, this needs to be appreciated in its proper
context. Earlier, we have mentioned that in such specialized equipments, the
supplier also will be concerned about its proper functioning. The
malfunctioning of the equipment may be due to either some defect in the
equipment itself or due to faulty installation. So far as defect in
installation is concerned, then as per Clauses 15.6 and 15.7 of the
installation contract, it is the responsibility of the installation contractor
to remove that defect. It is only for some defect in the equipment that the
supply contractor will be responsible. This also explains as to why the
project personnel of the supply contractor need not be on site. The fact that
the supply contractor is not responsible for faulty installation shows the
difference between the situation in the present case and the situation in the
case of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (supra) wherein the assessee was responsible
for any damage to the vessel even after the property had passed to the buyer.
Further, the "Delays" clause in both the agreements makes the respective
contractors responsible for delays on their part, i.e. to deliver the
equipment or to install the equipment as the case may be. In no way, one
contractor can be held responsible for the delay on the part of the other
contractor in performing his part of the contract. Clause 21 in the supply
contract and Clause 17 in the installation contract provide for the respective
warranties, and are to the same effect as they are with regard to other
clauses. Further, as per Clause 20 of the installation contract, it is the
installation contractor who has to provide training to the personnel of JT
Mobiles. The supply contractor is in no way concerned about such training.
Again, the Termination Clause (Clause 31.2 in the supply contract and Clause
25.2 in the installation contract) in both the agreements clearly show that
one contractor is in no way concerned with the termination of the other
contract, meaning thereby that if JT Mobiles terminates, say, the supply
contract, still it may continue with the installation contract and vice versa.
This indicates that all the contracts need not be considered as one whole
contract nor does it indicate that it is a works contract. Further, in case of
supply contract, if any notice is required to be sent, the same will have to
be sent at the Swedish address of the supply contractor. On the other hand, in
case of installation contract, the notice will have to be sent to the Indian
address of the installation contractor.

119\. Having considered the main clauses of the two agreements, we come to the
most important clause of title and risk. Clause 13.1 provides that the risk of
loss and damage to the System, the Spare Parts, the Testing Equipment and the
Documentation, shall pass to JT Mobiles when delivered to the carrier at the
port of shipment in Sweden to the city of India. Clause 13.2 provides that the
title to hardware, spare parts and test equipment shall pass to JT Mobiles
when delivered to the carrier at the port of shipment in Sweden. Reverting
back to the provisions of SOG Act, the basic rules regarding transfer of
property in goods are contained in Sections 20 to 24. Section 20 provides that
where there is an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods in a
deliverable state, the property in the goods passes to the buyer when the
contract is made, and it is immaterial whether the time of payment of the
price or the time of delivery of the goods, or both, is postponed. It is not
in dispute that the goods were ascertained and were in a deliverable state. It
is also not in dispute that the seller (i.e. the supply contractor) had to do
nothing to ascertain the price or that the goods were sent on approval basis.
Therefore, the provisions of Sections 21 to 24 of the SOG Act are not
applicable. Section 20 provides that the property in the goods passes to the
buyer when the contract is made. However, Section 19(3) provides that the rule
in Section 20 will apply only if there is no different intention. The
intention of the parties in the case of Ericsson is that the title will pass
when the goods are delivered at the port of shipment in Sweden. Thus, at the
first instance it can be said that the sales are completed outside India.
However, as provided in Section 19(2) of the SOG Act and also as held in the
case of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (supra), this simple recital in the agreement
may not be enough to infer the real intention. Regard has to be had to the
terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the circumstances of the
case. In this connection, we have already analyzed the various clauses of the
supply contract and the installation contract. Nowhere from the said analysis
can it be inferred that the intention of the parties was something else than
what is stipulated in Clause 13 of the supply agreement. Nothing has been
brought on record to show that the conduct of the parties was contrary to what
is stipulated in Clause 13 of the agreement. There is no circumstance which
points to the contrary. The goods in question were specific and ascertained,
it was an unconditional sale and the parties intended that the title will pass
outside India and they have not done anything or not acted contrary to the
declared intention. As per Section 26 of the SOG Act, the risk, prima facie,
passes with the property unless otherwise agreed. In the present case, the
parties have agreed that the risk will also pass at the time of deliveryn to
the carrier. Thus, both risk as well as title, have passed simultaneously
outside India and therefore, we hold that sales of GSM equipment by Ericsson
to the cellular operators were completed outside India.

120\. From the analysis of the various clauses in the two contracts, we have
also concluded that all agreements put together cannot be termed as works
contract. At this juncture, we may refer to the Marketing Agreement as well
which was entered into between the assessee and the Indian branch of Ericsson
Telephone Corporation India AB (EFC) for a period of three months and between
the assessee and Ericsson Communications Pvt. Ltd. (ECI) for the remaining
period of none months. On perusal of both the agreements we find that the
Indian Counterpart (be it EFC or ECI) is to render services to the Swedish
company, i.e. the assessee, only on broad lines, viz. (a) promotion of the
products of the assessee in India, and (b) provision of information on
business opportunities in India for the assessee in relation to its products.
Further, it is specifically provided inter alia, that the Indian counterpart
has no role to play as a mediator between the assessee and any Indian buyer,
it cannot bind the assessee in any manner while promoting its products in
India and that the final terms of contract for sale of products with an Indian
buyer will be decided by the assessee only. It is also stipulated that nothing
in) the agreement shall create or shall be deemed to create any relationship
of agency, partnership or joint venture between the parties. Moreover, nothing
has been brought on record to show that the parties have acted otherwise. The
Indian counterpart has neither exercised nor habitually exercises any
authority to conclude any contracts on behalf of the assessee. Neither the
party to the marketing agreement, nor the installation contractor maintained
any stock of goods. The CIT (Appeals) has given a categorical finding to this
effect in para 8.5 of his order. Further, neither of the parties has secured
or habitually secures any orders for the assessee. If that be the case, how
can the three agreements be read as one integrated document and how can it be
treated as a works contract -we simply fail to understand. One of the
arguments of Mr. Sharma was that by disintegrating the works contract into
three separate agreements, the parties have attempted to evade tax and,
therefore, it would be open to the income-tax authorities to lift the veil of
the transaction on the strength of the judgment in the case of Mcdowell
(supra). This argument runs counter to the unchallenged finding of the CIT
(Appeals) (para 8.3 of his order) that it cannot be said that the various
concerns were formed purely with a view to avoid or evade tax in India. As
regards the applicability of the Mcdowell judgment, we can do no better than
quote the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of
Union of India v. Azadi Bachao Andolan (263 ITR 706) at page 760:

"It thus appears to us that not only is the principle in Duke of
Westminister's case (1936) AC 1 (HL); 19 TC 490 alive and kicking in England,
but it also seems to have acquired judicial benediction of the Constitutional
Bench in India, not withstanding the temporary turbulence created in the wake
of McDowell's case (1985) 154 ITR 148 (SC)."

121\. Before concluding the issue relating to "Business Connection", it will
not be out of place to refer to the Overall Agreement on which also much
emphasis was placed by Mr. Sharma. This agreement is between the assessee, the
installation contractor and JT Mobiles. The preamble to this agreement, inter
alia, states that the supply contractor and the installation contractor have
agreed to act in a coordinated manner. Clause 2 of the agreement provides that
the supply contractor shall have overall responsibility. Clause 5.5 of the
agreement provides that in the event that the installation contractor
terminates his contract, the supply contractor shall locate the new
installation contractor. Clause 6 of the agreement provides that the overall
agreement shall prevail over the other contracts. Mr. Sharma had stressed on
all these points to contend that nothing more was required to show that it was
a works contract. In our view, nothing turns on the overall agreement. It
needs to be appreciated that the arrangement by way of an overall agreement is
nothing new and has been invoked in such contracts. When different entities
are working for the ultimate commissioning of the project, the Indian buyer,
or for that matter any buyer needs to be instilled with confidence that the
project will ultimately take off and be on stream as desired. For this, an
overall responsibility needs to be fixed. Ultimately, the installation
contractor has to install the equipment supplied by the supply contractor. In
that case we see no reason as to why the two should not work in a coordinated
manner. In fact, it is of utmost necessity. But merely because they are
working in a coordinated manner, me separate contracts do not lose their
sanctity and enforceability and the parties to the respective contracts remain
bound by the terms and conditions of those contracts. Board's Instruction No.
1829 dated 21.9.1989 supports this contention. The said Instruction of course,
pertains to power projects, but the principles apply to all big projects with
equal force. Considering the terms of the contracts in the present case in the
light of the above Instructions, no payment accrues either to the supply
contractor or to the installation contractor under the overall agreement. The
overall agreement is to ensure supervision and to guarantee performance of all
the contracts in a coordinated manner. Therefrore, there is no force in the
argument that the overall agreement supports the work contract theory. The
said Instructions of the Board, of course, also states that various contracts
should not be clubbed together unless they are undertaken by the same foreign
company. In the present case, one of the allegations of the revenue is that
the supply contractor, the installation contractor (EFG) and the Indian
company (ECI) with which marketing agreement was entered into, all belong to
the same LME Group of Companies and hence all the contracts should be clubbed
together. We are not agreeable to this proposition for the reasons that
follow.

122\. Firstly, in our view, Instruction No. 1829 speaks of clubbing the
contracts together only if they are undertaken by the same foreign company. In
the present case, contracts are not undertaken by the same company. All the
three companies are separate independent entities. Merely because they belong
to the same group, they do not become one entity. Moreover, there is no
evidence to show that one is dependent on the other either financially or in
any other manner. Secondly, it is the finding of the CIT (Appeals) that
various group concerns have been formed for the purpose of business and have
been doing business independently as per their instruments of incorporation.
This finding is not challenged by the revenue. Thirdly, the department has
also recognized their independent status by assessing the Indian company (ECI)
as well as the branch of the foreign company (EFC) separately. Assessment
orders in the case of ECI for assessment years 1997-98 to 2001-02 are placed
on record. Intimation under Section 143(1)(a) in the case of EFC for the
assessment year 1997-98 is also placed on record. In the assessment order for
the assessment year 1997-98 in case of ECI, it is mentioned that the company
is engaged in the business of telecommunications. It is further mentioned that
the company is involved, inter alia, in the assembly, installation and
construction of telephony networks and also in providing different information
technology (software) solutions. Moreover, its income in respect of the
installation contracts is assessed in its hands. Further, evidence that it is
an independent entity is reflected from the assessment order for the
assessment year 1998-99 wherein it is mentioned that the company has set up a
unit in software technology, park at Bangalaore and has claimed its income of
Rs. 91,39,921 as exempt under Section 10A of the Act. Thus, in view of these
facts, there is no reason to treat the three contracts as one works contract.

123\. In the final analysis, we hold that:

(a) the three companies, viz. Ericsson Radio Systems AB (ERA, the assessee),
Ericsson Telephone Corporation (India) AB (EFC) through its branch in India
and Ericsson Communications Ltd. (ECI) are three independent entities doing
business independently,

(b) the three contracts, viz. the supply contract, the installation contract
and the marketing and business promotion agreement are separate and
independent contracts and are not to be treated as one integrated works
contract despite the overall agreement;

(c) the assessee had no business connection in India,

(d) the sales of GSM Mobile Telephone System by the assessee to the cellular
operators in India took place outside India; and hence,

(e) no income accrued to the assessee in India from the sale of GSM Mobile
Telephone System to various cellular operators in India.

PERMANENT ESTABLISHMENT

124\. The next issue we take up for consideration is whether the assessee had
a permanent establishment (PE) in India. At the outset, it may be mentioned
that the CIT (Appeals) has held that the assessee has no PE in India. This
decision of the CIT (Appeals) is challenged by the revenue on two grounds:

(a) that the contracts for installation of GSM Cellular Network between the
assessee and Indian operators were signed in India.

(b) That the number of employees of the assessee and other associate companies
visited India and during their visits used infrastructural facilities of
Indian operators and the Indian subsidiary.

So far as the first ground is concerned, the installation contract was not
between the assessee and the Indian cellular operators. It was between the
Indian branch of Ericsson Telephone Corporation India AB for a period of first
three months and between the cellular operators and Ericsson Communications
Ltd. for the remaining nine months. Therefore, the ground raised is
misconceived and is liable to be dismissed for that reason alone. Nonetheless,
we shall adjudicate on the issue presuming that what the revenue meant was
supply contract land not the installation contract. In fact, Mr. Dastur had no
objection to our proceeding on that basis and had also addressed arguments
which we have adverted to earlier. As regards the second ground, the CIT
(Appeals) has concluded that the assessee has no PE in India on any count,
that is, either fixed place PE or Agency PE etc. The revenue has challenged
the decision of the CIT (Appeals) only on one ground. Hence, actually we need
not go into the other grounds on which the CIT (Appeals) held that there is no
PE. However, elaborate submissions were made in respect of all the reasons and
hence we will deal with those reasons also, but briefly. Before proceeding, it
may be mentioned that we have kept in mind the basic contention of Mr. Dastur
that DTAA is, only an alternative tax regime and not an exemption regime.
Therefore the burden is first on the revenue to show that the assessee has a
taxable income under the DTAA and then the burden is on the assessee to show
that its income is exempt even under DTAA.

125\. Article 5 of the DTAA explains the express "Permanent Establishment"
(PE). The Assessing Officer has partially reproduced this article in his order
to the extent considered necessary by him. However, it appears that he has
reproduced the said article from the new treaty which came into force from
25.12.1997. For the purposes of this appeal, since the accounting year ended
on 31.3.1997, we shall be referring to the earlier treaty which was entered
into vide Notification No. GSR 380(E) dated 27.3.1989 and which is given at
page 83 of assessee's paper book-1. The Assessing Officer has held as follows:

1\. That there is a dependent agent PE in the form of EFC (for 3 months).

2\. That there is a dependent agent PE in the form of ECI (for 9 months).

3\. That there is a PE in the form of a branch providing fixed place of
business to the assessee.

4\. That the office of ECI is a fixed place of business for the assessee
company.

5\. That the employees of the assessee company were coming to India and
signing contracts and were staying in India and using various facilities which
clearly showed that the assessee had a fixed place of business.

126\. The arguments of the Assessing Officer for arriving at the above
conclusions can be summarized as follows:

1\. That the overall agreement placed full responsibility on the assessee for
supply, erection and after sales services.

2\. That the supply contract and the installation contract were signed on the
same day.

3\. That either EFC or ECI had no technical expertise and permanent employees
of LME came to India for installation.

4\. That both, EFC and ECI were economically dependent on the assessee in so
far as that the share capital in the companies was contributed by LME and
commission income was earned from the assessee only by these two companies.

5\. That the assessee had complete control over the management, affairs and
functioning of its associates.

6\. That the facilities of EFC and ECI were utilized by the employees coming
to India.

7\. That the assessee was responsible for the installation of the equipment.

8\. That the Acceptance Test Certificate was signed by the installation
contractor on behalf of the assessee.

9\. That various employees came to India for networking, discussions and
negotiations.

10\. That the Indian company maintained stocks on behalf of the assessee.

11\. That the carriage and insurance for the equipment was the responsibility
of the assessee and goods were delivered at a port in India.

12\. That the contract was complete when acceptance test was carried out and
was successful.

13\. That the overall responsibility of the assessee under the Overall
Agreement was not a matter of comfort but it was an overall guarantee provided
by the assessee.

14\. That the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Mahabir Commercial
Co. Ltd. v. CIT (86 ITR 417) was not applicable to the facts. Instead,
according to him, the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Performing
Right Society Ltd. (106 ITR 11) was applicable.

127\. We now turn to the provisions contained in Article 5 of the DTAA.
Article 5.1 states that the term "Permanent Establishment" means a fixed place
of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly
carried on. The thrust of the Assessing Officer's contention has been that
since the employees of the assessee and / or LME came to India frequently and
since the Indian company (ECI) provided facilities to these employees, the
office of ECI constituted a fixed place of business for the assessee. The OECD
commentary on Double Taxation refers to a "fixed place" as a link between the
place of business and a specific geographical point. It has to have a certain
degree of permanency. It is emphasized that to constitute a "fixed place of
business", the foreign enterprise must have at its disposal certain premises
or a part thereof Phillip Baker in his. Commentary on Double Taxation
Conventions and International Tax Law (3rd edition) states that the nature of
the fixed place of business is very much that of a physical location, i.e. one
must be able to point to a physical location at the disposal of the enterprise
through which the business is carried on. On the other hand, possession of a
mailing address in a state without an office, telephone listing or bank
account - has been held not to constitute a permanent establishment. Further,
the fixed place of business need not be owned or leased by the foreign
enterprise provided it is at the disposal of the enterprise in the sense of
having some right to use the premises for the purposes of its business and not
solely for the purposes of the project undertaken on behalf of the owner of
the premises.

128\. Reverting to the facts in the case of Ericsson, it is not in dispute
that the assessee has no office in India, either owned or leased. The
allegation against it is that it used ECI's office for its own purposes and
that ECI provided facilities to the employees of the assessee whenever they
visited India. However, the revenue has failed to establish that ECI had made
certain space available to the assessee at its disposal. In other words, there
is nothing to indicate that whenever any employee of the assessee visited
India, he could straightaway walk, into the office of ECI and occupy a space
or a table. Merely because ECI allowed the visiting employees to use certain
facilities occasionally, it cannot be said that the assessee had at its
disposal, as a matter of right, certain space which could be characterized as
a fixed place of business. A travel agency in Paris had made an office
available to the German company from time to time, and the manager of the
German company had a flat in Paris. The Administrative Court of Appeal of
Paris held that the German Touristik Service reported in (1998) 1
I.T.L.R.857), travel agency did not have a PE in France (Societe France). As
against this, the Brussels Court of Appeal has held that a German resident
engaged in the transportation of vehicles had a PE in Belgium as he had an
office 3 m by 6 m at his disposal on the premises of his principal supplier in
Belgium, together with telephone and telex, where the German and his tour
employees worked (KH v. Belgium (1995) 3 R.G.F. 100). The assessee's case is
akin to that of the German travel agency in the first mentioned case and not
to the German resident in the second mentioned case. Therefore, in the light
of this discussion, it cannot be said that the assessee had a PE in India as
envisaged in Article 5.1 of the DTAA.

129\. Article 5.2 of the DTAA specifically includes the following in the
definition of the term "Permanent Establishment":

(a) a place of management,

(b) a branch,

(c) an office,

(d) a factory,

(e) a workshop,

(f) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of
natural resources,

(g) a warehouse in relation to a person providing storage facilities for
others,

(h) premises used as a sales outlet or for receiving or soliciting orders, and

(i) an installation or structure used for the exploration of natural
resources.

Out of the above, there is neither any finding nor even an allegation that the
assessee has any of the above locations in India, except perhaps, the one
mentioned in item (h), i.e., premises used as a sales outlet or for receiving
or soliciting orders. This allegation is on the basis of the Marketing
Agreement entered into by the assessee with ECI. However, while dealing with
the issue of business connection earlier, we have already held that nothing
really turns on it. ECI has no authority to conclude any contract on behalf of
the assessee and none of its actions can bind the assessee. When such is the
arrangement, it cannot be said that the premises of the ECI were being used by
the assessee for its business or that it really did some business from the
said premises. Therefore, under Article 5.2 also it cannot be said that the
assessee had a PE in India.

130\. As per Article 5.3 of the DTAA, the term "Permanent Establishment"
encompasses a building site, a construction assembly or installation project
or the like or supervisory activities in connection therewith where such site,
project or activity continues for a period of six months. In the present case,
the assessee (Ericsson) had entered into contracts with ten different cellular
operators for the supply of GSM equipment. Thus, ten systems were to be
installed by the installation contractor. In that case, as per the OECD
commentary, the period of six months has to be considered separately for each
installation. It was argued that under the overall agreement, since the
assessee had the overall responsibility for the commissioning of the project,
the installation site constituted a PE for the assessee in India. However, no
evidence is led by the revenue to show whether any installation site continued
for a period exceeding six months. The second limb of Article 5.3 is that if
the project or supervisory activity, being incidental to the sale of
equipment, continues for a period of less than six months, then the
installation site will become a PE only if the charges for the project or
supervisory activity exceed 10 per cent of the sale price of the equipment.
For the sake of argument, if we accept the revenue's contention that the
assessee was responsible for the installation of the equipment, either on
account of its employees being present or under the overall agreement, no
charges have been paid to the assessee under any agreement either by the
installation contractor or by the cellular operator. In fact, it has been one
of the main contentions of Mr. Dastur that no income accrues from the overall
agreement and this argument is in consonance with the Board's instruction No.
1829 also. Thus, though the primary responsibility of installation was that of
the installation contractor, the fact remains that no income accrued to the
assessee in India from the overall agreement for overseeing the installation
of the equipment. Therefore, under Article 5.3 of the DTAA also, the assessee
cannot be said to be having a permanent establishment.

131\. We now deal with Articles 5.5 and 5.6 of the DTAA which pertain to
Agency PE. Simply stated, Article 5.5 provides that where a person other than
an independent agent is acting on behalf of the foreign enterprise in the
other country, then the foreign enterprise shall be deemed to have a PE in
that other country. As mentioned, Article 5.5 speaks of a person other than an
independent agent. Hence, first it would be necessary to determine whether ECI
is an independent agent for which we shall have to go to Article 5.6 of the
DTAA. Article 5.6 provides that if a broker, commission agent or any other
agent is working for a foreign enterprise in the ordinary course of his
business, then such an independent agency shall not constitute a PE for the
foreign enterprise. However, if the activities of such an agent are devoted
wholly or almost wholly for the foreign enterprise or for enterprises subject
to the same common control, then such an agent shall be considered a dependent
agent. However, in such a case, provisions of Clause 5.5 will apply.

132\. Even though in para 122 we have held that all the three companies are of
independent status notwithstanding that they belong to the same group, if we
assume for the sake of argument that ECI is subject to the same common control
as the assessee as both are subsidiaries of LME and that all its activities
are devoted to the assessee, yet it will not become an Agency PE for the
assessee because (a) it has not, and does not, habitually exercise, in that
State (in India) and authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the assessee
(Ericsson) or (b) it does not habitually maintain in India a stock of goods or
merchandise from which it regularly delivers goods or merchandise on behalf of
the assessee. While dealing with the issue of "Business Connection", we have
given a categorical finding that ECI has no role to play as a mediator between
the assessee and any buyer. It cannot bind the assessee in any manner while
promoting its products in India and that the final terms of contract for sale
of products with an Indian buyer will be decided by the assessee only. We have
also held that ECI has neither exercised nor habitually exercises any
authority to conclude any contracts on behalf of the assessee. It is also
found that ECI does not maintain any stock of goods. Mr. Dastur has placed on
record a copy of the communication dated 19.1.2000 from ECI to the Assessing
Officer to the effect that if there is any defective part, the same is sent to
ERA at Sweden for repair or replacement. This signifies that ECI does not
maintain any stock of goods on behalf of the assessee and nothing is brought
on record to controvert this claim of the assessee. Details are also placed on
record to show that each of the ten contracts entered into by the assessee for
supply of GSM System, was signed by the officials of the assessee. Thus, it is
evident that ECI had no authority to conclude the contracts on behalf of the
assessee". In fact, the Assessing Officer himself has admitted at page 40 of
his order that the employees of the assessee company came to India for
planning and negotiations and concluded the contracts in India. Thus, neither
EFC nor ECI had any role to play so far as conclusion of supply contracts were
concerned. Prof. Dr. Klaus Vogel, in his treatise on Double Taxation
Conventions, states that this question must be decided not only with reference
to private law but must also take into consideration the actual behaviour of
the contracting parties. An approach relying solely on aspects of private law
(the law pf contracts) would make it easily possible to prevent an agent from
being deemed a PE even where he is engaged most intensively in the
enterprise's business. He would be allowed only to negotiate contracts up to
the point when they were finalized and ready to be signed, but the final
signature, to satisfy the proprieties, would be reserved to someone from the
enterprise's headquarters in the other contracting state. Such a formal split-
up of business responsibilities on the one hand and legal authority on the
other, is considered to constitute a case of "tax circumvention" where
substance should prevail over form. A PE should, therefore, be deemed to exist
irrespective of what the formal arrangements were. In the present case, there
is no finding that either EFC or ECI were instrumental or even participated in
the negotiations with the cellular operators. Thus, even the conduct of the
parties, on which Dr. Klaus Vogel lays emphasis, do not go to suggest in any
way that EFC or ECI could be impressed with a stamp of permanent establishment
for the assessee in India. The Assessing Officer has laid much stress on a
number of employees of the assessee coming to and staying in India for long
periods and making use of the facilities of EFC and ECI. However, as found by
the CIT (Appeals), there are no details to support this claim of the Assessing
Officer. In the absence of any details, it cannot be held that the assessee
had a PE in India.

133\. In the case of CIT v. Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (109 ITR 158), the Andhra
Pradesh High Court observed that whether it is goods that are supplied or
services that are rendered, the common thread of mutual interest must run
through the fabric of the trading activities carried on outside and inside the
taxable territories. The commonness of interest may be by way of management
control or financial control or by way of sharing of profits. It may also come
into existence in some other manner. But there must be something more than a
mere transaction of sale and purchase between principal and principal.
Applying these principles of "real and intimate connection" to the facts of
the case before them, their Lordships held that though the Polish company had
agreed to render certain limited services, those services were connected with
the effective fulfillment of the contract of sale and were merely incidental
to the contract, usually included in all such contracts, by way of guarantee
of the efficient working of the products sold.

134\. In the case of Ericsson, its main and primary interest ended once the
GSM system was sold to the cellular operators. The responsibility of
installing the system was not of the assessee. The responsibility it had under
the overall agreement was akin to that of the Polish company in the case of
Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (supra). No income accrued to the assessee either from
the overall agreement or from the installation agreement or from the marketing
and business promotion agreement. Thus, it cannot be said that the assessee
had any permanent establishment in India. Further since the transaction did
not create an "intimate connection" between the assessee and EFC or ECI, the
latter cannot be regarded as PE in India for the assessee.

135\. The decision of the Delhi Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Dy. CIT
v. CIT Alcatel (47 ITD 275) clinches the issue in favour of the assessee. In
this case, the Government of India, through ITI, a Government Undertaking,
entered into four different agreements on 28.7.1982 with the assessee - a non-
resident French company, for the development and manufacture of electronic
digital telephone switching equipment in India. The assessee - company, bound
by the agreements, had to send French Engineers very often. It therefore,
thought it fit that there should be some arrangement in India for organizing
the reception of such engineers, helping them in their customs clearance,
their transportation, accommodation, maintenance of their residential
buildings, making travel arrangements, providing facilities like telephone,
telex, accounting, secretarial and other assistance. To achieve this, the
assessee company entered into an agreement with an Indian company called
Mekaster Consultants P. Ltd. (MCPL) on 5.4.1983 for providing, what are
described as support services to the French engineers. MCPL was, however, not
authorized or empowered to transact any business in the name or on account of
CIT Alcatel. In consideration, of the support services, MCPL was to receive a,
lumpsum of Rs. 60 lacs for the calendar year 1983. Thereafter, the lumpsum was
to be revised twice a year by mutual agreement to reflect the volume of the
services actually rendered. The attempt of the department was to treat MCPL as
the PE of the assessee company in India and inter alia, to tax the profit
arising from the sale of equipment made to the Government of India, though the
same was delivered in France FOB French Port.

136\. Almost identical arguments were advanced by the Department in that case
as they are advanced before us, viz. (a) all the agreements should be seen as
only one agreement, (b) it was like a works contract, (c) it was a turnkey
contract, (d) title in the goods was not passed to the Indian party at France,
(e) that acceptance certificate was the key to the supply contract, (f) that
the assessee had a business connection in India and (g) that the assessee had
a PE in India. The Tribunal rejected all the arguments of the department
except that about PE in India. But the argument regarding PE came to be
accepted on account of the concession made on behalf of the assessee.

137\. Adverting to the facts in the case of Ericsson, there is no such
agreement as was with MCPL in the case of Alcatel for support services. The
employees of Ericsson merely came to India for negotiations and to conclude
the contracts, in the course of which EFC/ECI extended their facilities but
not enough to constitute a PE and hence the conduct of the parties was also
not a pointer in that direction. Further, in the case of Alcatel (supra),
despite there being a concession about PE, profit arising from the sale of
equipment was held to be not taxable in India as the sale was completed
outside India. Similar is the case of Ericsson, albeit on a stronger footing
insomuch so that it has no PE in India. Acceptance test is also no criterion
because even if the test is negative, the title in the goods is not to revert
back to the supplier as is held in the case of Alcatel (supra). As regards
works contract, all contracts to be regarded as one, overall agreement etc.,
we have already dealt with in detail in the earlier part of the order. To the
same effect is the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the caswe of
Addl. CIT v. Skoda Export, Praha (172 ITR 358). Thus, we hold that no income
accrued to the assessee (Ericsson) in India as it had no permanent
establishment in India which could give rise to business profits taxable in
India.

Royalty

138\. Ground No. 5 in the appeal of Ericsson is that the payment made by the
assessee for the use of software in the equipment does not amount to royalty
and that the Income-tax authorities were not justified in treating the payment
as royalty. The arguments advanced by Mr. Dastur in respect of this ground are
adverted to in the following paragraphs.

139\. The main argument advanced was that the software is to make the
equipment which is known as the hardware, work and, therefore, the payment
therefore cannot be viewed as a royalty for the use of software as such. The
payment is part of the payment made for the entire equipment. In support of
this argument, attention was drawn to page 22 of paper book No. 1 which is the
Supply Agreement which defines the word "systems" as including the software
also. In fact it says that the system includes hardware and software "forming
the entire GSM Mobile Telephone System". It was submitted that the payment for
the software was not similar to a pharmaceutical company obtaining a formula
and paying royalty for the same. In recital No. 2 of the agreement at page 20
of the paper book No. 1, the software is referred to as "application
software". This only means that the hardware and software constitute one
integrated telephone system. It was clarified that the word "license" was used
in connection with the payment for software only because the software was
given to the assessee with certain restrictive conditions and from the mere
use of that word, it cannot be inferred that the payment was similar to a
license fee and hence royalty. The software was given to the assessee in
perpetuity and so long as the system was to be operated by the assessee, the
software would also be operated as part of the system.

140\. In support of the above argument, Mr. Dastur drew our attention to
certain clauses in the supply agreement. Clause 7.1 defines the word "price"
as the total price fixed for the system as a whole. It was clarified that
annexure-V to the supply contract did show separate price for the software but
that was only for the purpose of paying customs duties to the Indian
government. Clause 13 provided that the risk in the software passes
simultaneously with the hardware. Clause 20.1 provided that the software would
be available for the exclusive use of JTM but without the right of commercial
exploitation. JTM can use the software only for working the GSM mobile
telephone system and not otherwise. Clause 20.4 provided for the passing of
information about the software to the employees of JTM on "need to know
basis". Certain other restrictions are also imposed by this clause, such as
having a back-up if the main software failed. Clause 20.5 provided that JTM
may transfer the software but only if the hardware is also transferred. Clause
20.7 coined the expression "inseparable package", to refer to the GSM mobile
telephone system suggesting that the hardware and the software cannot be
operated without each other. Clause 26 provided that the hardware and software
would go together, both having been "purchased" by JTM. The JTM could purchase
additional software by a separate contract of sale and all the supplies of
software were actually transactions of purchase and sale only, though as
mentioned earlier, the initial supply of software was referred to as
"license", only because of certain restrictions. But the title in the software
was to be that of J.T. Mobiles only, and had the word "license" been used in
the classical sense then it would have been obligatory on the part of JTM to
return the software. That not being the case, it was contended that the amount
paid towards software cannot be termed as "royalty". Moreover, the so called
license was not also granted under intellectual property rights.

141\. Mr. Dastur then proceeded to refer to Section 9(1)(vi) of the Income-tax
Act which provides for the source rule of taxability of income by way of
royalty. The A.O. has relied on the second proviso which takes within the
purview of the definition of deemed income, the income by way of royalty in
respect of computer software, the supply by a non-resident manufacturer along
with computer or computer based equipment under any scheme approved under the
Policy on Computer Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of
the Government of India.

141.1. Clause (v) of Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi) says that royalty means
consideration for the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of
a license) in respect of any copyright, literary, artistic or scientific work
including films or video tapes for use in connection with television or tapes
for use in connection with radio broad casting, but not including
consideration for the sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic
films. The Assessing Officer's stand, relying on the second proviso to Section
9(1)(vi), is that the software supplied by the assessee along with the
hardware is not covered by any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software development and Training, 1986, of the Government of
India and, therefore, the payment made by JTM would be considered as royalty
under the main provision. The argument of Mr. Dastur, the learned counsel for
Ericsson is two fold. It is firstly contended that computer software is
protected by the copyright law of India and Section 2(o) of the Copyright Act,
1957 defines "literary work" to include computer programmes, tables and
compilations including computer databases. The computer programmes are not
capable of being protected by patent. Once it is so classified, it is not
permissible to treat it as forming part of Clause (i) or (iv) of Explanation 2
to Section 9(1)(vi) and consequently it cannot be brought to tax within these
clauses. Secondly, it is contended that the claim of the A.O. that the second
proviso to Section 9(1)(vi) provides an exemption only in respect of specific
software acquired under the prescribed scheme and any software which is not
covered under the scheme is taxable as royalty, is untenable in law. It is
submitted that the exemption to specific software which is covered by the
scheme mentioned in the proviso is only by way of abundant caution and it does
not necessarily imply that software which is not covered by the scheme is
covered within the purview of Section 9(1)(vi). It is contended that it is a
well settled principle of law that something which is carved out as an
exception in the provision, without including the same in the main section,
does not necessarily mean that such item is covered by the main provision.
Support for this argument is taken with reference to the following decisions:

1\. CIT v. Madurai Mills Co. Ltd. 89 ITR 45 (SC)

2\. CIT v. United Western Bank Ltd. 259 ITR 312 (SC)

3\. International Instruments Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT 133 ITR 283 (Kar.).

4\. Meteor Satellite Ltd. v. ITO 121 ITR 311 (Guj)

5\. CIT v. Copes Vulcan Inc. 167 ITR 884 (Mad)

6\. CIT v. Uco Bank 32 ITR 688 (SC)

7\. CIT v. T.P. Sidhwa 133 ITR 840.

141.2. Mr. Dastur thereafter proceeded to address arguments with reference to
the DTAA between India and Sweden, a copy of which has been placed at page 83
of paper book Noll. Article 13.3 of the DTAA defines royalty to mean payment
of any kind received as consideration for the "use or right to use" any copy
right of literary, artistic or scientific work including cinematographic film,
films or video tapes for use in connection with television or model, plan,
secret formula or process for use or right to use any industrial, commercial
or scientific equipment or for information concerning industrial, commercial
or scientific experience. It is pointed out firstly that the definition of
royalty in the DTAA is narrower than the one given in the Income-tax Act as
the term "similar property is absent in the definition given in the DTAA.

141.3. The second difference between the Income-tax Act and the DTAA so far as
definition of "royalty" is concerned is that as per the DTAA the consideration
is "for use or right to use" and does not mention any lump sum consideration
as is mentioned by the Act. The argument is that under the DTAA it follows
that the amount of royalty would vary with the use whereas in the case of a
lump sum consideration, it is not linked with the use and is payable
irrespective of whether it is used or not. One may not use it because of
various reasons such as new technology replacing the old etc. Nevertheless the
lump sum consideration would be payable. Another argument advanced on the
basis of phraseology of Article 13.3 of the DTAA is this. The Article refers
to consideration for the use or right to use "any copyright of literary,
artistic or scientific work" (underlining ours). The word "of' is not found
between the words "copyright" and the words which follow, namely, "literary,
artistic or scientific work" appearing in Clause (v) of Explanation 2 to
Section 9(1)(vi). It is argued that the word "of should be read between the
words "copyright" and the words which follow, namely, "literary, artistic or
scientific work....." appearing in Clause (v) to Explanation 2 of Section
9(1)(vi).

141.4. Turning to Article 13.5 of the DTAA, it was pointed out by Mr. Dastur
that royalty can be considered as business income if it is "effectively
connected with a permanent establishment" in India. In this connection, our
attention was drawn to pages 42 to 46 and 65 to 68 of the assessment order in
which the A.O., in support of his stand that the payment for the software
should be considered as royalty received by the assesses, has held that since
the assessee has a permanent establishment in India, the amount of royalty is
to be assessed as business income in the hands of the assessee @ 30%.

141.5. Mr. Dastur referred to the order of the CIT(A) on this aspect. There
were two broad premises which formed the basis of the conclusion of the
CIT(A). The first premise is that the software supplied to JTM is loaded on to
the hand set of the ultimate user. Mr. Dastur pointed out that this is a
wholly erroneous premise, challenged in ground No. 9 specifically taken before
the Tribunal. He referred to page 208 of paper book 2 which is a certificate
given by Reliance Telecom Cellular Operator denying that any part of the
software is loaded to the hand set of the customer. The second premise of the
CIT(Appeals) was that the payment of royalty depended on the number of
customers of the cellular operators. Clarifying this aspect, Mr. Dastur
submitted that the software supplied, by the assessee is equipment specific
and had a specified installed capacity which cannot be expanded and it was not
hand set specific or sim card specific. He drew our attention to page 206 of
paper book No. 2 and also to paragraphs 2.2 onwards of page 71 of paper book
No. 2.

141.6. We shall now proceed to refer to the submissions and propositions put
forth by Mr. Dastur on the question of royalty. The following three broad
submissions were put forth by him:

i) The payment is not "royalty" Under Section 9(1)(vi) read with Explanation
2(v) or under the DTAA.

ii) There is no independent supply of software by the assessee; what is
supplied is the hardware (GSM Mobile telephone equipment) and the where withal
to make the hardware function. Therefore, the sale of software is part of the
sale of hardware and not independent of it.

iii) Assuming the first two submissions noted above are not correct, the third
submission is that the question for consideration would be whether the
assessee has given any copyright or transferred any right in a copyright or
has given the use of copyright or whether the assessee has supplied a copy
righted article.

141.7. According to Mr. Dastur it has to be first ascertained as to under
which part of the Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi) should the payment be
settled. His submission was that if at all, the payment has to be slotted
under Clause (v) of the Explanation, which specifically deals with such a
payment. In this regard, he contended that if the payment fells within a
specific provision, that provision must be applied and only if it does not
fell thereunder, can the general provision be resorted to. Accordingly, he
contended that where the explanation contained a specific slot for "copyright"
the clauses which applied to "similar property" cannot be said to include
copyright. Therefore, if at all, only Clause (v) of Explanation 2 can be
invoked.

141.8. In support of the general proposition that where there is a specific
provision dealing with a particular type of payment, the general provision
cannot be considered applicable, Mr. Dastur referred to the following
judgments:

1\. CIT v. Uco Bank 32 ITR 688 (SC).

2\. Meteor Satellite Ltd. v. ITO 121 ITR 311 (Guj)

3\. CIT v. Copes Vulcan Inc. 167 ITR 884 (Mad),

4\. CIT v. T.P. Sidhwa 133 ITR 840 141.9. Mr. Dastur then proceeded to
consider the various clauses of Explanation-2 and pointed out that they do not
cover the payment with which we are concerned in the present appeal. Clause
(i) refers to transfer of rights or granting license in respect of a patent,
invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar
property. But-software supplied did not fall under any of these items. Clause
(ii) refers to the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or
the use of a patent, invention, etc. etc. Since the assessee by supplying the
software does not impart any information, this clause is also not applicable.
Clause (iii) refers to the use of any patent, invention etc. Since Clause (i)
which refers to transfer of rights in such items, is not applicable, there is
no question of Clause (iii) being applicable. Clause (iv) which refers to
imparting of any information concerning technical, industrial, commercial or
scientific knowledge, experience or skill is also not applicable because the
software supplied by the assessee was not supplied for the purpose of
imparting any such information. Clause (iva) was introduced only w.e.f
1.4.2002 and hence not relevant for the year under appeal. Clause (vi) refers
to rendering of services in connection with the activities referred to in Sub-
clauses (i) to (iv) and (v). Since Sub-clauses (i) to (iv) are not attracted
to the present case, Clause (vi) is also consequently not attracted.

141.10. The only clause which, if at all, can be applied to the present case,
according to Mr. Dastur is Clause (v). Even this clause is not applicable and
in support of this stand Mr. Dastur put forth the following propositions.

141.11. The first proposition put forth was whether the assessee would make
payment if the software was not linked to something else? The answer according
to him is to be in the negative because a person would never acquire or pay
for the software alone or which was to be used as a stand alone equipment. The
second proposition was that the payment was in order to obtain the system and
not to obtain the software as such. It was a part of obtaining of the whole
system and the payment was not a consideration for any of the items mentioned
in Clauses (i) to (v) of Explanation 2. The third proposition was that,
assuming that the purchase of software was to be considered separately, then
could it be said that the payment was for transfer of any right in a copyright
or that, was it for any license in respect of a copyright. At this juncture,
he gave an illustration of a publisher who gives to another person a right to
print copies and sell. According to Mr. Dastur, this would amount to granting
of license and will fall Under Section 9(1)(vi) of the Act. But if software is
given, not per se as software but to make hardware work, then the
consideration paid cannot be said to be for software alone. In that case, the
payment would not amount to royalty. Reiterating his argument, it was
submitted that as per the agreement, there was really no separate transaction
for software. The purpose was to acquire the whole system for a lump sum price
and that software was specified separately in the annexure only for the
limited purpose of paying customs duty. In support of this contention, Mr.
Dastur relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of CIT v.
Mugneeram Bangur & Co. 57 ITR 299. He further contended by referring to pages
205 and 207 of paper book 2, that the assessee had accounted for the amount
received for software under the head "Net Sales" in its books of account and
that the Indian operator (RPG Cellular Services Ltd.) had accounted it as a
capital asset in its books of account and though the entries were not
determinative, they showed as to how the parties had acted. In support of
these contentions, Mr. Dastur relied on the following decisions:

CIT v. Klayman Porcelains Ltd. 229 ITR 735 CIT v. Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Ltd. 243 ITR 459 CIT v. Mitsui Engineering & Ship Building Co. Ltd. 259 ITR
248 CIT v. Sundwiger Emfg and Co. 262 ITR 110 and Lucent Technologies
Hindustan Ltd. v. ITO 82 TTJ 163 141.12. Having referred to these decisions,
Mr. Dastur contended that even if the payment fells within the bare wording of
Section 9(1)(vi), one has to see what the consideration is paid "for". It has
to be for the things mentioned in Clause (v) of Explanation 2 and the
submission was that the consideration was for the system as a whole. The
payment may fall within the "bare bones" of the provision, but not within the
"soul" thereof. Elaborating further his arguments, Mr. Dastur submitted that
if a foreign publisher gives a right to sell books in India, then is it a
right "in respect of any copyright? According to him, the test is, what is it
that a person can do when he has a copyright? Thus the question for
consideration was what exactly is copyright. Since the term "copyright'' is
not defined in the Income-tax. Act, nor in the DTAA, he referred to the
provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957.

141.13. Reference was made to Section 14(a) wherein the rights which are
generally available are listed. On the other hand, Section 14(b)(ii) mentions
a right which is available only to the owner of a computer programme. It was
submitted that only the person who has the copyright can sell or hire it. The
question, therefore, posed by him was whether J.T. Mobiles had any of the
rights mentioned in Section 14(a) or 14(b) of the Copyright Act. If J.T.
Mobiles did not have any of these rights then J.T. Mobiles did not have a
copyright. To show that J.T.M did not have any of those rights, he referred to
the Supply Agreement and referring to Clause 20 of the said Agreement, it was
claimed that J.T. Mobiles had a "non-exclusive" right which was different from
an "exclusive right" mentioned in Section 14 of the Copyright Act. Clarifying
this provision, it was submitted that whereas Ericsson had an exclusive right,
J.T. Mobiles did not have. In other words the essence of copyright is with the
holder thereof (Ericsson in the present case) who can do anything with respect
to it in the public domain whereas the licensee of the copyright (JTM in the
present case) cannot do so. As per Clause 20.4(b) of the Supply Agreement,
J.T. Mobiles cannot store or make copies of the software except for back-up
purposes. Section 14(a)(i) of the Copyright Act permitted a holder of the
Copyright to store or make copies for reproduction. Section 52(1)(aa) of the
Act permitted the licensee of the copyright to store or make copies of the
software only for back up or archival purposes, which would not be considered
as an infringement of the copy right. Reading these provisions together, the
position that emerges is that merely because J.T.M. could store or make copies
of the software only for back up or archival purposes, it cannot be said that
it has got the copyright in the software. All that it has got is only a
copyrighted article in the form of the software. The feet that J.T.M. cannot
license or sell the software, is also incorporated in Clause 20.4(d) of the
Supply Agreement. In contrast, Under Section 14(b)(ii) of the Copyright Act,
the holder of the copyright can license or sell the copyright.

141.14. Mr. Dastur thus contended that the provisions of the Copyright Act
read together with the various clauses of the supply contract showed that what
JTM had obtained was only a copyrighted article in the form of a software but
none of the incidents of a copyright itself. Therefore, there is no transfer
by the assessee of any right, including a license, in respect of a copyright.
Therefore, Clause (v) of Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi) does not apply.

142\. Mr. Dastur thereafter proceeded to address arguments on the basis of the
DTAA. He first pointed out that in Article 13.3 of the DTAA, the word used is
only "use" of the copyright. Significantly, this article does not use the word
"license" with reference to the copyright. In this aspect it differs from
Clause (v) of Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi). Having prefaced his
arguments, as above, he proceeded to advert to the OECD Commentary (relevant
extracts filed in the paper book) on the Model Convention. Mr. Dastur admitted
that the views expressed in the commentary are not binding but they have
persuasive value. Article 12 of the model convention deals with royalty.
Paragraphs 12 and 14 of the commentary contain the views expressed in relation
to Article 12 and its applicability. The gist of the commentary is that in
order to constitute royalty, the payment must be;

(a) for commercial exploitation of the software and if it is for the own use
of the payer, in his hardware, the payment cannot amount to royalty.

(b) The earning of the income should be traceable only to the software in
which case it will be considered as royalty, whereas if it is traceable to the
hardware, it will not amount to royalty but will amount to business income
under Article 7. Business income can be assessed in India only if the non
resident has a PE in India.

142.1. Paragraph 17 of the commentary provides for the apportionment of a
payment between business income and royalty. This position, however, does not
apply in India as per the views expressed in several authorities compiled in
the paper book and, therefore, we are not concerned with the apportionment.

142.2. Mr. Dastur next referred to the opinion expressed by the Internal
Revenue Service, USA, extracts from which are compiled at pages 136 to 202 of
the paper book No. 2. Here also it was admitted by Mr. Dastur that the opinion
is not binding but has persuasive value, In this opinion, the distinction
between copyright rights on one hand and a copyrighted article on the other
hand, has been brought out fully and clearly. The contention on the basis of
the opinion was that in the present case what JTM and other cellular operators
have obtained is only a copyrighted article in the form of a software and not
copyright rights. Reliance was also placed on pages 202 and 204 of paper book
No. 2 which is the learned author Du Troit's Commentary in which similar views
have been expressed.

101\. Mr. Dastur referred to the decision of the Bangalore Bench of the
Tribunal in the case of Lucent Technologies Hindustan Ltd. v. ITO (82 TTJ 163)
to emphasise the difference that had been brought out in the said decision
between copyright and a copyrighted article. It was submitted by him that one
cannot have a copyright without a copyrighted article, but one can have a
copyrighted article without a copyright. In the present case, the software was
stated to be only a copyrighted article and not a copyright. According to Mr.
Dastur, the test to be applied is to ask the question whether the Indian
company could have exercised any of the rights of the holder of the copyright
(the Swedish company). According to him the answer is in the negative. This
contention was elaborated by Mr. Dastur with reference to the extracts from
Iyengar's Copyright Act, 6th Edition.

142.4. Mr. Dastur next pointed out with reference to Article 13.3 of the DTAA
that JTM cannot be said to be "using" the software. He contrasted the software
with a secret formula, which certainly can be stated to be "used" by the
person who has acquired it. In the present case the software has been acquired
by JTM only to exploit the hardware and the payment was for the hardware.
Therefore, in his submission, it is not a case of "use" or "right to use" the
software per se within the meaning of the Article. It was further submitted
that there was no obligation on the part of JTM to return the software as it
was a perpetual license granted to it as per the supply agreement. Since there
was no obligation to return the software, therefore, the payment could not be
said to be for the use of software but it was for acquiring it. In support of
this contention, he referred to paras 15 and 16 of the OECD Commentary at page
180 of the paper book. According to this commentary, if the price is paid for
acquiring the ownership of the Article, it cannot be said to be a royalty.
Assuming that the copyrighted article was the same as acquiring a copyright as
contended by the Department, then also the payment cannot be termed as a
royalty because it was not a payment for the mere right to use and still it
would mean that the copyright rights are acquired by the payer. Therefore,
Article 13 of the DTAA would not be applicable.

142.5. It was, however, admitted by Mr. Dastur that if the Department is right
in its contention, then the payment will be caught within the mischief of
Explanation 2, Clause (v) of Section 9(1)(vi) of the I.T. Act because it uses
a wide expression namely "transfer of all or any rights" and is not restricted
to a mere "use" or "right to use". However, he clarified that his contention
is that the Department is not right in its contention to treat it as a
copyright.

142.6. The next contention of Mr. Dastur was that a lump sum payment (as
royalty) may fell within Article 7 of the DTAA as well as Explanation 2 to
Section 9(1)(vi) of the Act since lump sum consideration has been expressly
mentioned in the Article and the Act. However, Article 13 of the DTAA does not
refer to lump sum consideration. It refers only to "payment for use" and since
as already contended this is not a payment for use of the copyright, even this
Article is not applicable.

142.7. It was submitted by Mr. Dastur that by its very nature and as specified
in Section 14 of the Copyright Act, it is a right, something in abstract.
However, when the software is imported in chattel form, according to Supreme
Court, it is goods and attracts customs duty. According to him, then the
question arises whether it can be a copyright and "goods" at the same point of
time. According to him the answer has to be in the negative. He pointed out
that copyright is an Intellectual Property Right (IPR) which when imported in
a chattel form becomes goods. In support of this contention he referred to the
decision of the. Supreme Court in the case of ACC Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Customs 128 ELT 21 and also to the case of State Bank of India v. Collector of
Customs, Bombay (115 ELT 597).

143\. Mr. Dastur summed up his arguments with regard to the taxability of the
royalty payment as follows:

(1) No copyright right was given within the meaning of Section 14 of the Copy
Right Act and, therefore, it does not fall Under Section 9(1)(vi) of the
Income-tax Act or under the relevant provisions of the DTAA. The software is
"goods".

(2) The consideration paid is not "for" the copyright right but it is for the
"system" as a whole.

(3) The consideration is not paid for the software per se and, therefore, it
is not in any case royalty.

(4) The consideration paid is a lump sum consideration. Though Section
9(1)(vi) of the Act ropes in the lump sum consideration, Article 13 of the
DTAA does not do so.

(5) If at all, there is only a transfer of a copyrighted article. There is no
consideration paid for "use" of a copy right. Therefore, Article 7 of the DTAA
would apply and not Article 13.

(6) However, in order to attract Article 7, the assessee should have a PE in
India. Since it has not been established that the assessee has a PE in India,
nothing is chargeable even under this Article of the DTAA.

(7) Even assuming but not admitting that there is a PE in India, Article 7
would apply, on the Assessing Officer's own admission (in page 46 of the
assessment order). Therefore, only what is attributable to the PE is taxable
in India and not the entire payment made for the software. Factually it has
been established by the assessee that nothing is attributable to the PE and,
therefore, nothing is taxable in India.

144\. With reference to the additional ground of appeal taken by the assessee
in its cross objection, Mr. Dastur submitted that it raised the issue of the
rate of tax which is a purely legal issue requiring no investigation into the
facts and, therefore, prayed that the same should be admitted. On merits, he
submitted that the amendment made in the Finance Act, 2004 will have to be
considered and for the purpose of examining the same, the matter may be
restored to the Assessing Officer, if it is considered necessary. He further
relied on an order of the Mumbai Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Deca
Overseas (ITA No. 3604/Bom/94 dated 27.2.2004) and filed a copy thereof.

145\. Mr. G.C. Sharma, the learned senior counsel for the Department raised
the following points in support of the Department's case:

(1) All the three contracts are integrated and cannot be segregated.

(2) The preamble to the supply contract makes a distinction between the
hardware purchased and the use of "application software".

(3) The word "license" as defined in Section 30 of the Copyright Act is a
grant of authority to exercise a particular right. It gives only a limited
right in the use of the copyright. The supply contract in the present case
gives such an authority to JTM. There is, therefore, no need to refer to
Section 14 of the Copyright Act which refers to an exclusive right being
granted.

(4) Referring to various clauses of the supply agreement such as Clause 20.1,
20.2, 20.5, 30.1 and 30.2 etc., Mr. Sharma submitted that all these clauses
contain terms which are opposed to the concept of sale and, therefore, it
cannot be said that the software was sold to JTM or other Cellular operators.
It was merely licensed to them and the payment therefor was rightly taxed as
royalty.

(5) Granting a license by the author of a copyright only means granting a
limited right i.e. for the use for the purpose for which it is given and not
for anything else.

(6) Any interest granted in respect of a copyright which is a proprietary
right means a right to use a copyright.

(7) The sale of a computer programme contained in a software is a sale of a
copyright by itself.

(8) If the assessee exercised its right to sell the software, it would amount
to a copyright within the meaning of Section 14 of the Copyright Act.

(9) Clause 20.5 of the Supply Contract authorizes JTM to sell the system and
along with it the software itself. The copyright is vested in the software
programme and when the JTM sells software, the assessee also sells the
copyright therein.

146\. With reference to Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi) of the Income-tax
Act, Mr. Sharma submitted that it includes lump sum consideration for
utilizing any of the rights mentioned in various clauses. This, according to
Mr. Sharma, would amount to a price being charged by the owner of the IPR.
Clause (i) or (iii) or (v) of Section 9(1) may apply in these circumstances.
An IPR may be taken in by the words "similar property" appearing in Clause (i)
and (iii) of Section 9(1). Therefore, any consideration for the transfer of
rights or for use of IPR can be taxed as royalty. What is stated in all the
clauses of Explanation (2) below Section 9(1)(vi) are different species of
IPRs. Clause (v) clearly applies to the case because it specifically mentions
"copyright". According to Mr. Sharma even a limited interest in a copyright
can be a license, the payment for the use of which may amount to royalty. So
far as double taxation agreement is concerned, Mr. Sharma pointed out that in
Article 13.3 which contains a definition of royalties, "any kind" of payment
is included which obviously includes a lump sum payment and, therefore, it is
not correct to say that the lump sum payment is taken in only under the
provisions of the Act and not the provisions of DTAA. The computer programme
embedded in the software is a literary or scientific work and the "use of
copyright" must be construed as the use of a copyrighted article. If so
construed the license to use a copyrighted, article, to a limited extent,
amounts to use of copyright. Mr. Sharma submitted that the article (of DTA)
must be reasonably and practically construed without being too technical. He
also relied on the Note filed by him before the Bench under the heading
"Motorola Royalty Issue".

147\. Strong reliance was placed by Mr. Sharma on paragraph 9.1 at page 34 of
the order of the CIT(Appeals). He pointed out that though the hardware is the
subject of sale, the software was the subject of a license. He, however,
conceded that the second proviso to Section 9(1)(vi) of the Act does not apply
to this case. As regards the order of the Bangalore Bench in the case of
Lucent Technologies (supra), Mr. Sharma submitted that it is distinguishable
on facts.

148\. In his reply in the appeal of M/s Ericsson Mr. Dastur contended as
follows:

(a) A license granted by Ericsson to the cellular operators will amount to a
right in respect of a copyright, only if the cellular operator can exercise
any of the rights mentioned in Section 14 of the Copyright Act and if the
cellular operator cannot exercise such rights, then the license cannot be in
respect of a copyright right. This idea is expressed in Section 30 of the
Copyright Act itself.

(b) In the present case almost all the rights mentioned in Section 14 of the
Copyright Act have been excluded.

(c) Only if M/s Ericsson gives a right to JTM or other cellular operators to
sell or hire the software, can it be said that a copyright has been given and
only then can the payment therefor amount to royalty (Section 14(b)(ii) of
Copyright Act).

(d) It is not in all cases that one need to have the copyrighted article with
him in order to exercise a copyright right. For example a listener of a speech
can memorise a speech and reproduce it from memory in a different place though
he may not have the speech with him in printed form. This is only an exception
to the general rule that one cannot have the copyright right without the
copyrighted article. But the corollary, namely, that because you have the
copyrighted article you also have the copyright in it, is not true.

(e) The answer to Mr. Sharma's argument that the words "similar property" are
used in Clauses (i) and (iii) of Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi) is two-
fold. Since copyright has been specifically dealt with in Clause (v) of the
Explanation, it cannot be said that Clauses (i) and (iii) also apply to
copyright. When a particular thing is specifically dealt with in one of the
clauses, it stands excluded from the sweep of the other clauses. The second
answer is that the words "similar property" are not used in Article 13.3 of
the DTAA and hence in any event if at all the term "copyright" is included in
the expression "similar property" then it would be out of DTAA.

(f) The supply contract does not confer upon JTM and other cellular operators
the right to sell the software alone. The right given is the right to sell the
hardware. Necessarily the software will be part of the system installed in it
and it will therefore go alongwith the hardware on sale. However, it will be
subject to all the restrictions under which JTM or other cellular operators
were placed under the supply contract and the purchaser will not get a better
right. Even the purchaser from JTM or other cellular operator will be subject
to the same restrictions as mentioned in the supply agreement.

(g) With regard to the Note filed by Mr. Sharma under the heading "Motorola
Royalty Issue", the following submissions were made by Mr. Dastur:

(1) The consideration paid for the software is not dependent on the number of
customers of JTM or other cellular operators as is erroneously assumed in the
Note.

(2) Under the Indian Law, computer programme is a literary work (Section 2(o)
of Copyright Act).

(3) The examples given in page 2 of the Note actually are in favour of the
assessee's contention and do not support the Department.

(4) None of the rights mentioned in Section 14 of the Copyright Act, with
reference to the software, has been given to JTM or the other cellular
operators.

(5) The Note itself very fairly and rightly recognizes the distinction between
a copyright right and a copyrighted article.

The above are the broad submissions made by both the sides in the case of M/s
Ericsson.

149\. The Assessing Officer, at the outset, referred to the preamble to the
agreement between the assessee and the cellular operator from which it was
gathered that the assessee had licensed the software and the customer had the
right to use the software. Referring to the other clauses of the contract, it
is stated by the Assessing Officer that the risk and title passed to the
customer in the case of hardware but not in the case of software. He
specifically referred to Clause 18 of the agreement and observed that the
right of the buyer was restricted in the following manner:

(a) Buyer can use it for own operation and maintenance of the system and not
otherwise.

(b) Buyer has no title or ownership rights.

(c) It is a trade secret of the contractor and is subjected to
confidentiality.

(d) Buyer cannot make it available to any person other than its employees.

(e) It cannot make copies.

(f) Buyer can neither license nor sell nor alienate or part with its
possession.

On account of the above restrictions, the Assessing Officer held that it was
not a sale as per Sale of Goods Act but it was a limited right to use the
software and hence the payment for the same was in the form of royalty. He
observed that the software had been developed for the specific use of the
customer and was not available off the shelf. Distinguishing between hardware
and software, the Assessing Officer observed that whereas hardware had been
sold to the customer, software was licensed to the customer. According to him
software was something abstract and intangible. Therefore, the Assessing
Officer held that the payment made for licensing of software had to be taxed
as royalty. Further, according to him, since the assessee had a PE in India,
the same had to be taxed as business profits at a flat rate of 30% as provided
in the Act.

150\. The CIT (Appeals) concurred with the Assessing Officer to hold that
payment for software was royalty, for the reasons that follow. Firstly,
according to him, though there was a single agreement for the sale of GSM
equipment, in substance, they were two agreements, one for the sale of
hardware and the other for the licensing of software, in so much so that the
consideration for software was separately specified in the agreement. Since
the agreement specifically provided for the licensing of the software, the
CIT(Appeals) was of the view that such licensing amounted to transfer of
copyright and not merely transfer of copyrighted article as was the contention
of the assessee. Interpreting the supply agreement, the CIT (Appeals) was of
the view that the consideration for license of software depended upon the
number of customers of the cellular operator According to him, a part of the
software was loaded on to the handset of the subscribers depending upon their
requirements. It was because of this loading of a part of the software that
the subscriber was able to get connectivity. He strengthened this view of his
by stating that the preamble to the supply contract stated that the assessee
wished to provide supply of GSM Mobile telephone system and application
software. Thus on this reasoning, the CIT(Appeals) held the payment made for
software to be royalty. Since he has also held that there was no PE of the
assessee in India, the payment for software was taxable as royalty under
Article 13 of the DTAA.

151\. We have considered the detailed contentions of both the parties. We have
already held that the assessee has no PE in India and, therefore, it cannot be
taxed as business profits under Article 7 of the DTAA. However, the CIT(A) has
held it to be taxable under Article 13 of the DTAA. The basic premise on which
the CIT (A) has rested his decision is that the software supplied by the
assessee was loaded on to the handset of the mobile subscriber and that the
consideration for use of the said software depended upon the number of
customers of the operator. This is factually wrong. Actually, the software
supplied by the assessee is, what can be termed as installed capacity. In
other words, the system supplied by the assessee, comprising of the hardware
and the software, can handle a particular number of subscribers. If the number
of subscribers go beyond the installed capacity, then the cellular operator
has a right, under Clause 26 of the supply agreement, to purchase additional
hardware and software.

152\. Further, the finding of the CIT (Appeals) to the effect that the
software is partly loaded on to the handsets of the subscribers, has been
specifically challenged by the assessee in ground No. 9. Added to this is a
certificate issued by Reliance Telecom, a cellular operator, a copy of which
is at page 208 of Paper Book No. II, in which it has been denied that a part
of the software has been loaded on to the handsets of the subscribers. It is
no doubt true that this certificate has been filed only before the Tribunal
for the first time, but it is, equally true that the allegation of the income-
tax authorities that a part of the software is loaded on to the handsets of
the subscribers has not been established on the basis of any material brought
on record. Therefore, even if the certificate is to be ignored as having been
filed for the first time before us, the allegation of the Department, not
having been established, the premise on which the decision of the CIT (A) is
based, does not exist. In addition, it is common knowledge that handset which
is purchased by the subscriber from the market contains several functions
which perhaps the income-tax authorities had in mind when they state that a
part of the software itself is loaded on to the handsets. It is common
knowledge that a person may purchase any brand of handset from the market and
still have access to mobile telephony of a different company which belies the
belief of the income-tax authorities that a part of the software supplied by
the assessee is loaded on to the handset with the subscriber. At our instance,
the learned counsel for the assessee filed a brief Note explaining the
Network, SIM Card and the Handset. The Note is in the form of questions and
answers from which we find the following aspects:

(1) That the handsets are not necessarily manufactured by the GSM system
supplier. For example the assessee Ericsson does not manufacture handsets.
Philips, Samsung, Alcatel, Panasonic, BenQ etc. are manufacturers of handsets.
The handset software merely enables the handset to function and interact with
the mobile telephony network, to whichever company it may belong. It also
contains various functions such as mailbox, phonebook, games, messaging.

(2) SIM card is manufactured by different companies and contains the IMSI
number stored therein, based on the information provided by the cellular
operator. These companies supply SIM cards to various cellular operators in
India.

(3) Network, SIM card and the handsets are independent components and they are
not inter dependent. An example is that of "Roaming access". Under this
system, the subscriber of a particular network, say HUTCH, has a freedom of
connecting into any other network of a different cellular operator, say BPL,
while roaming to another city (if authorized) within the country or outside
the country. The above referred Network can be of two different cellular
operators, having different hardware and software supplied by two different
GSM system suppliers.

153\. To illustrate the example further, let us take the case of roaming
access between Bombay and Delhi. A Bombay subscriber of Hutch network
(supplied by Ericsson) traveling or roaming to Delhi has a freedom to select
and use any of the following networks which are operational in Delhi:

    
    
       Network         Supplier of GSM system
    Airtel         Ericsson
    Hutch          Siemens & Motorola
    Idea           Nokia
     
    
    

In the above example, the subscriber using the handset of any manufacturer
(Samsung, Philips, Alcatel, etc.) in combination with SIM card of any
manufacturer (Gemplus, Schlumberger) can select any of the accessible network
of his choice while he is in Delhi for making and receiving calls. This
clearly indicates that the cellular operator does not transfer or load any
part of the software (comprised in the GSM system) on to the SIM card or the
handset of the subscriber. This establishes that the software supplied by the
assessee (Ericsson) to the cellular operator is installed on the hardware and
no part of it is loaded on the SIM card or the handset of the subscriber.

154\. It was further clarified that the manufacturer of handset in the name
"Ericsson" is different from and has nothing to do with the assessee before
us. It was also clarified that the software supplied by the! assessee is
equipment specific and not SIM card specific or handset specific. Reference
was made to page 206 of the Paper book No. II which is a certificate given by
the assessee company to this effect. Reference was also made to paragraph 2.2
of the written submissions made before the CIT (A), a copy of which is at
pages 34 to 95 of Paper book No. II. In this paragraph the assessee has stated
that the software supplied by it enables the functioning of the equipment and
enables the cellular operators to provide connectivity and other related
services to the subscribers. It is to confirm this that the certificate filed
at page 206 of the paper book was filed before the CIT (A) in the course of
the appeal proceedings. The rejection of these claims made by the assessee
does not appear to us to be based on cogent reasons or any evidence or
material brought on record to prove the contrary.

155\. It appears to us from a close examination of the manner in which the
case has proceeded before the Income-tax authorities and the arguments
addressed before us that the crux of the issue is whether the payment is for a
copyright or for a copyrighted article. If it is for copyright, it should be
classified as royalty both under the Income-tax Act and under the DTAA and it
would be taxable in the hands of the assessee on that basis. If the payment is
really for a copyrighted article, then it only represents the purchase price
of the article and, therefore, cannot be considered as royalty either under
the Act or under the DTAA. This issue really is the key to the entire
controversy and we may now proceed to address this issue.

156\. We must look into the meaning of the word "copyright" as given in the
Copyright Act, 1957. Section 14 of this Act defines "Copyright" as "the
exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorize the
doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any substantial
part thereof, namely:

(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer
programme, -

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in
any medium by electronic means;

(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;

(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;

(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;

(v) to make any translation of the work;

(vi) to make any adaptation of the work;

(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of
the acts specified in relation to the work in Sub-clauses (i) to (vi);

(b) in the case of a computer programme, -

(i) to do any of the acts specified in Clause (a);

(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial
rental any copy of the computer programme;

Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer
programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object of the
rental;

(c) in the case of an artistic work, -

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including depiction in three
dimensions of a two dimensional work or in two-dimensions of a three-
dimensional work;

(ii) to communicate the work to the public;

(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;

(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;

(v) to make any adaptation of the work;

(vi) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of the acts specified
in relation to the work in Sub-clause (i) to (iv);

(d) in the case of cinematograph film, -

(i) to make a copy of the film, including a photograph of any image forming
part thereof;

(ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film,
regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier
occasions;

(iii) to communicate the film to the public;

(e) in the case of a sound recording, -

(i) to make any other sound recording embodying it;

(ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the sound
recording regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on
earlier occasions;

(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.

Explanation, - For the purposes of this section, a copy which has been sold
once shall be deemed to be a copy already in circulation."

It is clear from the above definition that a computer programme mentioned in
Clause (b) of the section has all the rights mentioned in Clause (a) and in
addition also the right to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale
or for commercial rental any copy of the computer programme. This additional
right was substituted w.e.f. 15.1.2000. The difference between the earlier
provision and the present one is not of any relevance. What is to be noted is
that the right mentioned in Sub-clause (ii) of Clause (b) of Section 14 is
available only to the owner of the computer programme. It follows that if any
of the cellular operators does not have any of the rights mentioned in Clauses
(a) and (b) of Section 14, it would mean that it does not have any right in a
copyright. In that case, the payment made by the cellular operator cannot be
characterized as royalty either under the Income-tax Act or under the DTAA.
The question, therefore, to be answered is whether any of the operators can
exercise any of the rights mentioned in the above provisions with reference to
the software supplied by the assessee.

157\. We may first look at the supply contract itself to find out what JTM,
one of the cellular operators, can rightfully do with reference to the
software. We may remind ourselves that JTM is taken as a representative of all
the cellular operators and that it was common ground before us that all the
contracts with the cellular operators are substantially the same. Clause 20.1
of the Agreement, under the title "License", says that JTM is granted a non-
exclusive restricted license to use the software and documentation but only
for its own operation and maintenance of the system and not otherwise. This
clause appears to militate against the position, if it were a copyright, that
the holder of the copyright can do anything with respect to the same in the
public domain. What JTM is permitted to do is only to use the software for the
purpose of its own operation and maintenance of the system. There is a clear
bar on the software being used by JTM in the public domain or for the purpose
of commercial exploitation.

158\. Secondly, under the definition of "copyright" in Section 14 of the
Copyright Act, the emphasis is that it is an exclusive right granted to the
holder thereof. This condition is not satisfied in the case of JTM because the
license granted to it by the assessee is expressly stated in Clause 20.1 as a
"non exclusive restricted license". This means that the supplier of the
software, namely, the assessee, can supply similar software to any number of
cellular operators to which JTM can have no objection and further all the
cellular operators can use the software only for the purpose of their own
operation and maintenance of the system and not for any other purpose. The
user of the software by the cellular operators in the public domain is totally
prohibited, which is evident from the use of the words in Article 20.1 of the
agreement, "restricted" and "not otherwise". Thus JTM has a very limited right
so far as the use of software is concerned. It needs no repetition to clarify
that JTM has not been given any of the seven rights mentioned in Clause (a) of
Section 14 or the additional right mentioned in Sub-clause (ii) of Clause (b)
of the section which relates to a computer programme and, therefore, what JTM
or any other cellular operator has acquired under the agreement is not a
copyright but is only a copyrighted article.

159\. Clause 20.4 of the supply contract with JTM is as under:

20.4 In pursuance of the foregoing JT MOBILES shall:

(a) not provide or make the Software or Documentation or any portions or
aspects thereof (including any methods or concepts utilized or expressed
therein) available to any person except to its employees on a "need to know"
basis;

(b) not make any copies of Software or Documentation or parts thereof, except
for archival backup purposes;

(c) when making permitted copies as aforesaid transfer to the copy/copies any
copyright or other marking on the Software or Documentation.

(d) Not use the Software or Documentation for any other purpose than permitted
in this Article 20, Licence or sell or in any manner alienate or part with its
possession.

(e) Not use or transfer the Software and/or the Documentation outside India
without the written consent of the Contractor and after having received
necessary export or re-export permits from relevant authorities.

This clause places stringent restrictions on the cellular operator so far as
the use of software is concerned. It first says that the cellular operator
cannot make the software or portions thereof available to any person except to
its employees and even with regard to employees it has to be only on a "need
to know basis" which means that even the employees are not to be told in all
its aspects. What the assessee can do is only to tell the particular employee
what he has to know about the software for operational purposes. The cellular
operator has been denied the right to make copies of the software or parts
thereof except for archival backup purposes. This means that the cellular
operator cannot make copies of the software for commercial purposes. This
condition is plainly contrary to Section 14(a)(i) of the Copyright Act which
permits the copyright holder to reproduce the work in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by electronic means. We may also
notice Section 52(1)(aa) of the Copyright Act which lists out certain acts
which cannot be considered as infringement of copyright. The particular clause
permits the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the
lawful possessor of the copy and the computer programme in order to utilize
the public programme for the purpose for which it was supplied or to make
backup copies purely as a temporary protection against loss, destruction or
damage. Therefore, merely because the cellular operator has been permitted to
take copies just for backup purposes, it cannot be said that it has acquired a
copyright in the software.

160\. Clause 20.4(c) makes it mandatory for the cellular operator, while
making copies of the software for backup purposes, to also mark the copied
software with copyright or other marking to show that the rights of the
assessee are reserved. This is one more indication that what the cellular
operator acquired is not a copyright.

161\. Clause 20.4(d) says that the cellular operator cannot use the software
for any other purpose than what is permitted and shall not also license or
sell or in any manner alienate or part with its possession. This has to be
read with Clause 20.5 which says that the license can be transferred, but only
when the GSM system itself is sold by the cellular operator to a third party.
This in a way shows that the software is actually part of the hardware and it
has no use or value independent of it. This restriction placed on the cellular
operator (not to license or sell the software) runs counter to Section
14(b)(ii) of the Copyright Act which permits a copyright holder to sell or let
out on commercial rental the computer programme. For this reason also it
cannot be said that JTM or any cellular operator acquired a copyright in the
software.

162\. A conjoint reading of the terms of the supply contract and the
provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957 clearly shows that the cellular operator
cannot exploit the computer software commercially which is the very essence of
a copyright. In other words a holder of a copyright is permitted to exploit
the copyright commercially and if he is not permitted to do so then what he
has acquired cannot be considered as a copyright. In that case, it can only be
said that he has acquired a copyrighted article. A small example may clarify
the position. The purchaser of a book on income-tax acquires only a
copyrighted article. On the other hand, a recording company which has recorded
a vocalist has acquired the copyright in the music rendered and is, therefore,
permitted to exploit the recording commercially. In this case the music
recording company has not merely acquired a copyrighted article in the form of
a recording, but has actually acquired a copyright to reproduce the music and
exploit the same commercially. In the present case what JTM or any other
cellular operator has acquired under the supply contract is only the
copyrighted software, which is an article by itself and not any copyright
therein.

163\. We may now briefly deal with the objections of Mr. G.C. Sharma, the
learned senior counsel for the Department. He contended that if a person owns
a copyrighted article then he automatically has a right over the copyright
also. With respect, this objection does not appear to us to be correct. Mr.
Dastur filed an extract from Iyengar's Copyright Act (3rd Edition) edited by
R.G. Chaturvedi. The following observations of the author are on the point:

"(h) Copyright is distinct from the material object, copyrighted:

It is an intangible incorporeal right in the nature of a privilege, quite
independent of any material substance, such as a manuscript. The copyright
owner may dispose of it on such terms as he may see fit. He has an individual
right of exclusive enjoyment. The transfer of the manuscript does not, of
itself, serve to transfer the copyright therein. The transfer of the ownership
of a physical thing in which copyright exists gives to the purchaser the right
to do with it (the physical thing) whatever he pleases, except the right to
make copies and issue them to the public" (underline is ours).

The above observations of the author show that one cannot have the copyright
right without the copyrighted article but at the same time just because one
has the copyrighted article, it does not follow that one has also the
copyright in it. Mr. Sharma's objection cannot be accepted.

164\. It is not necessary, therefore, to consider the alternative argument of
Mr. Dastur, namely, that even assuming that the Department is right in saying
that if you have the copyrighted article, you also have the copyright right
therein, still it would mean that the copyright rights are transferred
(acquired by JTM) and it would not be a case of merely giving the right to use
and consequently Article 13 of the DTAA would not apply. Mr. Dastur, however,
was fair enough to concede that if the Department is right in saying that if
you have the copyrighted article, you also have the copyrighted rights, then
Clause (v) of Explanation 2 below Section 9(1) of the Income-tax Act will
apply because this clause ropes in "transfer of all or any rights" and is not
restricted to "use" or "right to use", the copyright. However, he added that
since the basic proposition of the Department has been demonstrated to be
wrong, Clause (v) of Explanation 2 below Section 9(1) is not an impediment to
accepting the assessee's contention.

165\. We may also usefully refer to the Commentary on the OECD Model
Convention (dated 28.1.2003) which is of persuasive value and which throws
considerable light on the character of the transaction and the treatment to be
given to the payments for tax purposes. Paragraph 14 of the Commentary, a copy
of which was filed in Paper book No. V is relevant:

COMMENTARY ON ARTICLE 12 - PAPER BOOK V "14. In other types of transactions,
the rights acquired in relation to the copyright are limited to those
necessary to enable the user to operate the program, for example, where the
transferee is granted limited rights to reproduce the program. This would be
the common situation in transactions for the acquisition of a program copy.
The rights transferred in these cases are specific to the nature of computer
programs. They allow the user to copy the program, for example onto the user's
computer hard drive or for archival purposes. In this context, it is important
to note that the protection afforded in relation to computer programs under
copyright law may differ from country to country. In some countries the act of
copying the program onto the hard drive or random access memory of a computer
would, without a license, constitute a breach of copyright. However, the
copyright laws of many countries automatically grant this right to the owner
of software which incorporates a computer program. Regardless of whether this
right is granted under law or under a license agreement with the copyright
holder, copying the program onto the computer's hard drive or random access
memory or making an archival copy is an essential step in utilizing the
program. Therefore, rights in relation to these acts of copying, where they do
no more than enable the effective operation of the program by the user, should
be disregarded in analyzing the character of the transaction for tax purposes.
Payments in these types of transactions would be dealt with as commercial
income in accordance with Article 7."

166\. We may also usefully refer to the proposed amendments to the regulations
of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the USA. Again these regulations may
not be binding on us but they have a persuasive value and throw light on the
question before us, namely the difference between a copyright right and a
copyrighted article. These regulations have been placed at pages 136 to 157 of
Paper book No. II. The actual regulations as well as the explanatory Note
explaining the object and the purpose of the proposed regulations have also
been given. In paragraph 1 of the Note titled "Background", it has been stated
that the proposed regulations require that a transaction involving a computer
programme may be treated as being one of the four possible categories. Two
such categories are the transfer of copyright rights and the transfer of a
copyrighted article. The U.S. regulations distinguished between transfer of
copyright rights and transfer of copyrighted articles based on the type of
rights transferred to the transferee. Briefly stated, if the transferee
acquires a copy of a computer programme but does not acquire any of the rights
identified in certain sections (of the U.S. Regulations), the regulation
classified the transaction as the Transfer of a copyrighted article. Paragraph
3 of the Explanatory Note says that if a transfer of a computer programme
results in the transferee acquiring any one or more of the listed rights, it
is a transfer of a copyright right.

167\. Paragraph 4 says that if a person acquires a copy of a computer
programme but does not acquire any of the four listed copyright rights, he
gets only a copyrighted article but no copyright.

168\. The actual regulations bring out the distinction very clearly between
the copyright right and a copyrighted article. They also specify the four
rights which, if acquired by the transferee, constitute him the owner of a
copyright right. They are:

(a) The right to make copies of the computer programme for purposes of
distribution to the public by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by
rental, lease, or lending.

(ii) The right to prepare derivative computer programmes based upon the
copyrighted computer programme

(iii) The right to make a public performance of the computer programme.

(iv) The right to publically display the computer programme.

169\. A copyrighted article has been defined in the regulation (page 147 of
the paper book) as including a copy of a computer programme from which the
work can be perceived, reproduced or otherwise communicated either directly or
with the aid of a machine or device. The copy of the programme may be fixed in
the magnetic medium of a floppy disc or in the main memory or hard drive of a
computer or in any other medium.

170\. So far as the transfer of copyrighted articles and copyright rights are
concerned, the regulation goes on to say (page 148 of the paper book) that the
question whether there was a transfer of a copyright right or only of a
copyrighted article must be determined taking into account all the facts and
circumstances of the case and the benefits and burden of ownership which have
been transferred. Several examples have been given below these regulations to
find out whether a particular transfer is a transfer of a copyright right or a
transfer of a copyrighted article.

171\. The Commentary of "Charl P. du TOIT" on this question has been placed at
pages 202 to 204 of Paper book No. II. The Commentary is titled "Beneficial
ownership of royalties in Bilateral Tax Treaties." He has opined that articles
such as Books and Records are copyrighted articles and if they are sold, the
user does not obtain the right to use any significant rights in the underlying
copyright itself, which is what should determine the characterization of the
revenue as sale proceeds rather than royalties. He has further opined that
consideration relating to sale of software can amount to royalty only in
limited circumstances.

172\. For the above reasons, we are of the view that the payment by the
cellular operator is not for any copyright in the software but is only for the
software as such as a copyrighted article. It follows that the payment cannot
be considered as royalty within the meaning of Explanation 2 below Section
9(1) of the Income-tax Act or Article 13.3 of the DTAA with Sweden.

173\. We may now proceed to consider the further question as to whether the
payment was "for" the software as such. In this connection, it must be
clarified that the payments for the hardware and software were in a lump sum
and there was no separate consideration mentioned for the hardware and the
software. It is the Department which has split the consolidated payment into
two - payment for hardware and payment for the software. In our opinion, since
the parties to the contract have not agreed upon a separate price for the
hardware and the software, it is not open to the income-tax authorities to
split the same and consider a part of the payment for software, to be treated
as royalty. We may refer to the Commentary on the Model Tax Convention on
Income and Capital, dated 28.1.2003. This Commentary is on the OECD Model of
DTAA. Paragraphs 15 & 16 of the Commentary throw light on a situation similar
to the one arising in the present case. These paragraphs are as follows:

"15. Where consideration is paid for the transfer of the full ownership of the
rights in the copyright, the payment cannot represent a royalty and the
provisions of the Article are not applicable. Difficulties can arise where
there are extensive but partial alienation of rights involving:

\- exclusive right of use during a specific period or in a limited
geographical area;

\- additional consideration related to usage;

\- consideration in the form of a substantial lump sum payment.

16\. Each case will depend on its particular facts but in general such
payments are likely to be commercial income within Article 7 or a capital
gains matter within Article 13 rather than royalties within Article 12. That
follows from the fact that where the ownership of rights has been alienated in
full or in part, the consideration cannot be for the use of the rights. The
essential character of the transaction as an alienation cannot be altered by
the form of the consideration, the payment of the consideration in instalments
or, in the view of most countries, by the fact that the payments are related
to a contingency."

174\. The observations made in the above Commentary, which though are not
binding but are of persuasive value, show that where the price is paid for
acquiring the ownership of the article itself, it cannot be termed as
"royalty". To this extent the above observations do support the contention of
the assessee that since the payment is only for the copyrighted article, it
cannot be considered as royalty.

175\. Coming to the question of splitting of the consolidated price paid in a
lump sum, we need to refer to the Bill of Entry for import which is placed in
Paper Book No. V filed by the assessee. This Bill of Entry for home
consumption shows that a price has been separately mentioned for the software.
This was sought to be explained oh behalf of the assessee that since the
software was also being imported alongwith the hardware, there had to be a
separate value placed against the software for purposes of assessing the
customs duty and it is only for this limited purpose that a value was placed
on the software. The argument was that from this it does not follow that the
parties themselves agreed for a separate price for the software. Reference was
made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Mugneeram
Bangur & Co. 57 ITR 299. The ratio of this decision is that where the parties
have agreed for a lump sum consideration for an undertaking as a whole,
without placing separate values for each of the items which go to make up the
undertaking, merely because certain values are placed separately in the
schedule to the contract, it does not follow that the parties had agreed also
for the price payable for each of those items. The contract remains a contract
of sale of the undertaking as such for a lump sum consideration. This ratio is
applicable to the present case, in our opinion. It is not in dispute that the
contract did not mention separate price for the hardware and the software. It
is only the cellular operator, who is the importer of the GSM system as a
whole, who placed a value on the software for purposes of paying import
duties. The import duty is charged @ 10% plus 2% on the value placed on the
software. There is no evidence to show that the assessee was party to the
fixation of the value for software for custom duty purposes. At any rate what
was being imported is the GSM cellular system as a whole which included both
the hardware and the software. The software was specific to the hardware and
will not work in any other equipment. The certificate to, this effect has
already been referred to by us, which was filed before the CIT (A). In such
circumstances, it is not possible to infer, merely on the basis of the Bill of
Entry and the custom duty payment on the software, that a separate
consideration was agreed to between the parties for supply of the software.

176\. In CIT v. Sundwiger EMFG & Co. and Ors 262 ITR 110, there were two
agreements between the non resident and the Indian company, one for supply of
capital equipment and another for provision of technical services to supervise
the installation of the capital equipment. On a conjoint reading of the
contracts, it was held by the Andhra Pradesh High Court that both the
contracts constituted one and the same transaction and cannot be read in
isolation of the other. It was observed that the services rendered by the
experts and the payments made for the services were part and parcel of the
sale consideration and could not be severed and treated separately as income
of the non resident company for services rendered by it in erection of the
machinery. It must be noted that despite separate contracts being entered into
between the parties, it. was held that both constituted a single transaction.
This ratio applies to the present case a fortiori. In the present case there
is only one supply contract which includes the supply of both the hardware
(GSM Cellular equipment) and the software which is part of the hardware. A
single lump sum consideration is mentioned in the contract. Therefore, there
is all the more reason to hold that the lump sum payment cannot be segregated
into two, namely, one for the hardware and another for the software.

177\. The judgment of the Madras High Court in CIT v. Neyveli Lignite
Corporation Ltd. 243 ITR 459 also reiterates the aforesaid principle. In that
case the price paid by the assessee to the supplier was a total contract price
covering all stages involved in the supply of machinery from the stage of
design to the stage of commissioning. It was held that the information
concerning the working of the machine was incidental to the supply, as the
machinery was tailor made for the buyer. Unless the buyer knows the way in
which the machinery has been put together, the machinery cannot be maintained
in the best possible way and repaired when occasion arises. It was, therefore,
held that the contract cannot be split to spell out a separate payment for the
information concerning the design and the working of the machine which can be
treated as royalty Under Section 9 of the Income-tax Act. The ratio of this
judgment applies to the present case.

178\. To the same effect is the ratio laid down by the judgment of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in CIT v. Klayman Porcelains Ltd. 229 ITR 735 where a kiln
was to be set up by the foreign company. The Income-tax authorities treated
the amount paid by the Indian company as payment for technical drawings and
hence royalty. The Tribunal held that the amount so paid was for the capital
asset supplied from abroad for a price. The decision was upheld by the High
Court.

179\. In CIT v. Mitsui Engg. And Shipbuilding Co. Ltd. 259 ITR 248, it was
held by Delhi High Court that it was not possible to apportion the lump sum
consideration as for design on the one part and for engineering,
manufacturing, shop testing and packaging, on the other. It was, therefore,
held that the transfer of designs would not fall within Explanation 2 below
Section 9(1)(vi) of the Income-tax Act.

180\. The above judgments support the proposition put forth by the assessee
before us that the payment was not made for software separately and hence
cannot be treated as royalty.

181\. In two of the recent judgments rendered by the Supreme Court, it has
been held that though information technology is generally regarded as an
intangible asset but the moment such technology is put on a media, whether
paper or cassettes or disc or any other thing, then what is supplied becomes a
chattel and the chattel becomes goods liable to customs duty. We may refer to
Associated Cement Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs (2001) 128 ELT 21. The
contention before the Supreme Court, adverted to in paragraph 12 of the
judgment, was that the knowledge though valuable was intangible and the media
on which it has been recorded was only a vehicle of transmission incidental to
the main transaction and cannot be considered as sale of goods. This
contention was rejected by the Supreme Court, by referring to Section 12 of
the Customs Act which imposes duty on goods imported into India. According to
Section 2(22)(e) of the Customs Act, goods include "any other kind of movable
property". The Court observed that the definition of "goods" is so worded that
all tangible moveable articles will be goods for the purpose of the Act,
including any media whether in the form of books or computer discs or
cassettes which contain information technology or ideas. In paragraph 30, the
Supreme Court observed that though it is true that the technical advice or
information technology is an intangible asset, but the moment the information
or advice is put on a media, whether paper or disc or any other thing, what is
supplied becomes a chattel and customs duty is attracted.

182\. Several earlier judgments have been noticed in this judgment, one of
which is State Bank of India v. Collector of Customs, Bombay (115 ELT 597
(SC). In this case, the State Bank had imported computer software and manuals
and it was held that these were goods on which import duty was payable. There
is also reference to judgments of the English & American Courts. In St. Albens
City and District Council v. International Computers Ltd. (1996) 4 All. E.R
481, it was held that a computer programme on a disc should be regarded as
goods.

183\. Similarly, in Advert Systems Ltd. v. Unisys Corporation 925 F. 2d 670
(3rd Cir 1991), the Court in the United States held that computer software was
goods. The following observations of the United States Court are relevant,
which were approvingly cited by the Supreme Court in Tata Consultancy Services
v. State of A.P. (2004) 271 ITR 401 (SC) (@ page 418):-

"Computer programs are the product of an intellectual process, but once
implanted in a medium are widely distributed to computer owners. An analogy
can be drawn to a compact-disc recording of an orchestral rendition. The music
is produced by the artistry of musicians and in itself is not a 'goods'. But
when transferred to a laser-readable disc becomes a readily merchantable
commodity. Similarly, when a professor delivers a lecture, it is not a goods,
but, when transcribed as a book, it becomes a goods.

That a computer program may be copyrightable as intellectual property does not
alter the fact that once in the form of a floppy disc or other medium, the
program is tangible, movable and available in the market place. The fact that
some programs may be tailored for specific purposes need not alter their
status as 'goods' because the Code definition includes specially manufactured
goods"

The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Associated Cement Co. Ltd.
(supra) was rendered by a Bench consisting of three learned Judges which has
subsequently been followed by a Bench consisting of five learned Judges in the
case of Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh (supra).

184\. In view of the foregoing discussion, we hold that the software supplied
was a copyrighted article and not a copyright right, and the payment received
by the assessee in respect of the software cannot be considered as royalty
either under the Income-tax Act or the DTAA.

185\. Attribution of income: We had held, inter alia, that (a) the assessee
has no PE in India and (b) that there is no business consideration in India.
Therefore, the question of attributing any income to either of these does not
really arise. However, we have found that all the contracts were signed in
India and hence a question may arise as to whether any income could be
attributed to such activity. In our view, no income can be so attributed
because either by way of business connection or because of the PE, what are to
be taxed are only business profits. Since there is a DTAA (between India and
Sweden), as per the well-established position in law that the DTAA shall
prevail over the provisions of the Act, the business profits, even if accruing
to the assessee by way of signing of the contracts in India, would not be
taxed because the assessee has no PE in India as required by Article 5 read
with Article 7 of the DTAA.

186\. To sum up our decision in the case of Ericsson:

Assessee's appeal: (ITA No. 815/Del/2001).

Ground Nos. 1-4: The notice Under Section 142(1) has been issued beyond the
limitation period and hence invalid. Consequently, the assessment is invalid.

Ground Nos. 5, 7 to 9: The amounts received by the assessee for the software
cannot be assessed as "royalty" either under the Income-tax Act or under the
DTAA.

Ground No. 6: The assessee has no "business connection" in India and hence no
income accrued Under Section 9(1)(i) of the Income-tax Act.

Department's Appeal (ITA No. 1798/Del/2001) Ground No. 1: The CIT (A) was
right in holding that assessee did not have a PE in India.

Ground No. 2. Consequently, the CIT (Appeals) was also right in holding that
the income from the supply of software is not taxable as business income.

Ground No. 3: The CIT (Appeals) did not err in deleting the interest charged
under Section 234B, on merits. The levy of interest under Section 234A is
however, restored to the Assessing Officer with the directions contained in
para 74.

C.O. (By assessee) (No. 60/Del/01:

Ground Nos. 1-3: The CIT (Appeals) was not right in holding that the assessee
had a business connection in India from which in come was deemed to accrue or
arise in India under Section 5(2) of the Income-tax Act in respect of the
supply of GSM cellular equipment to Indian cell operators.

In the result, the appeal and cross objection of the assessee are allowed and
the appeal of the Department is partly allowed.

MOTOROLA (A.Y. 1997-98) ARGUMENTS:

187\. The appeal for Motorola relates to assessment year 1997-98 for which
year the revenue is also in appeal. At the outset, Mr. Syali, the learned
counsel appearing for Motorola, stated that in case of each mobile operator,
there were essentially two contracts namely the supply contract and the
installation contract. His first submission was that no part of the
installation contract was taxed in the hands of the assessee. The revenue
arising from the installation contracts stood assessed in the hands of the
Indian company to whom the supply of equipment was made. In all, the assessee
had entered into contracts with seven different parties. The A.O. framed his
order by referring to the contract with Sterling whereas the CIT(Appeals) had
referred to the contracts with Sterling as well as with Usha. The parties
agreed that these two contracts are representative of all the contracts
entered into by the assessee.

188\. Now turning to the grounds in the appeal and the arguments of both
sides, the first ground relates to the validity of assessment on the ground of
limitations in connection with the issue of notice Under Section 142(1) of the
Act. This issue has been dealt with in detail above while dealing with the
case of Ericsson. There we have also narrated in detail the arguments of Mr.
Syali and hence the same need not be repeated here.

189\. Ground Nos. 2 to 4 cover the basic question which was referred to the
Special Bench and ground Nos. 5 to 8 are stated by Mr. Syali to be not grounds
by themselves, in the sense that no relief has been asked for in these grounds
but they only challenge the various findings of fact recorded by the Income-
tax authorities in relation to ground Nos. 2 to 4.

190\. Mr. Syali first took up ground No. 2 which relates to the existence of a
permanent establishment of the assessee in India. In this connection, he read
out the order of the CIT(Appeals) in detail. It was submitted by him that the
CIT(Appeals) had categorically held in his order that there was neither a
service PE nor an installation PE nor an agency PE belonging to the assessee
in India. In this connection he referred to pages 24, 25, 26, 30 and 31 of the
order of the CIT(A). The CIT(Appeals), however, had held that the assessee had
a fixed place PE in India in the form of office of the Indian company. It was
contended that against the findings of the CIT(A) that there is no service PE
or Installation PE or Agency recorded by the Commissioner, the revenue is not
in appeal and hence what survives is only whether the assessee had a fixed
place PE in India. It was submitted that assessment years 1995-96 and 1996-97
were the initial assessment years of the assessee for which no action was
taken against the assessee. It was only for the first time during the year
under consideration that the assessee was called upon to file its return of
income by issue of notice Under Section 142(1) of the Act. So for as the
Indian company was concerned, it was stated to be an independent economic
entity which had been separately assessed since its incorporation in 1989. The
income returned by the Indian company included income from installation
contracts and it was assessed in its hands as such. Mr. Syali referred in
detail to the reasoning of the CIT(A) at page 24 of his order to hold that
there was a fixed place of PE in India. To counter this reasoning, Mr. Syali
referred to the various clauses of the agreement entered into by the assessee
with Sterling. The main contention by referring to the various clauses of the
agreement was that the contract could not be frustrated except for the want of
DOT compliance. Another main argument of his was that the title in the goods
had passed outside India, though the risk in the goods was to pass in India.
But according to him the passing of the risk in India cannot frustrate the
title in the goods. Elaborating further on this aspect, he referred to certain
provisions of the Sale of Goods Act in particular, the provisions of Sections
4, 15, 16, 26 read with 40 and 39 were referred to. Controverting the
contention of the revenue that since the risk in the goods had passed in
India, so the title also passed in India, it was contended that all the
conditions implied in Sections 15 and 16 of the Sale of Goods Act had been
complied with. Referring to the provisions of Sections 26 and 40 of the Sale
of Goods Act which referred to the risk interior to sale and risk following
the sale respectively, it was argued that both were different and independent
of the title in the goods. Referring to Section 39 of the Sale of Goods Act,
it was submitted that there was no right of disposal after the goods were
handed over to a named carrier and where the goods were described, delivery
was effected, documents were given to the carrier at the time of delivery and
lastly when 70% of the consideration had been paid by the time the goods were
handed over to the carrier, nothing remain to complete the same. Thus the sale
was completed outside India. It was submitted by Mr. Syali that merely because
certain services were to be provided in India, it did not mean that the sales
were completed in India. According to him the acceptance test also was not the
criteria. The services which were to be rendered in India were merely
obligations incidental to the sales and not "de hors" the sales. Therefore, if
they were incidental to sales, they cannot constitute a separate source for a
PE in India. Again reverting to the aspect of passing of risk, it was argued
that merely because the risk was to pass in India, it did not make the sale a
conditional sale. In this connection, he referred to Clause 13.1 of the
contract and pointed out that the nature of risk described therein was only a
loss on account of damage in which case the equipment was to be replaced but
the contract was not to be repudiated.

191\. Referring to the Supreme Court decisions in the case of H.E.H. Nizam's
Religious Endowment Trust v. CIT, A.P. (59 ITR 582) and in the case of
Parimisetti Seetharamamma v. CIT, AP (57 ITR 532), it was contended that
though the onus was on the assessee to show that its income was exempt, the
initial onus was on the Department to show that there was some income earned
by the assessee. No conjectures or surmises could be I permitted to conclude
that the assessee had earned any income. It was also submitted that there was
no negative onus on the assessee to show that there was no income. In this
connection, a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of M.S. Bose v. K.S.
Gandhi and Ors. (1991) 2 SCC 716 was referred to.

192\. Mr. Syali's next argument was that the salaries of the expatriates were
paid by the assessee (Motorola) and the perquisites were provided by the
Indian company. In the assessment of the Indian company, there was no
disallowance of the perquisites which gives rise to the inference that those
perquisites were paid by the Indian company to the expatriates only for the
purpose of its own business. It was also pointed out that the assessee
furnished a list of expatriates to the Assessing Officer (pages 13 and 14 of
the paper book) containing the service agreement with the expatriates and the
details of their visits to India which were very short. The contention is that
if the employees who were paid by the Indian company under the sale/purchase
agreement, were performing the work of the assessee company as alleged by the
A.O., there was no need for the assessee to send more and more expatriates in
India on short visits. Thus even the preponderance of probabilities in
relation to the visits of the expatriates to India was in favour of the view
that they performed the work only of the Indian company and not the assessee
company. Thus even on this ground, it cannot be stated that there was a fixed
place PE of the assessee in India. It was pointed out in this connection that
the A.O. failed to make any enquiries, which he could have, with the Reserve
Bank of India as to why the expatriates came to India. It was pointed out that
the expatriates are required to fill up a statutory form under the relevant
immigration rules which could have been verified by the A.O. in order to find
but the purpose of their visit. Having omitted to do so, his conclusion that
the expatriates came to India only to work for the assessee company is a
surmise and a factually incorrect conclusion. No assessment can be made on the
basis of surmise which does not satisfy the requirement of Section 143(3) that
an assessment shall be made only on the basis of "materials" gathered by the
Assessing Officer. In support of these submissions, reliance was placed on the
following authorities:

1\. DCIT v. Acatal 47 ITD 275 (Del),

2\. Albright & Wilson Ltd. v. ITO 19 ITD 125

3\. ITO v. Vine Chemicals Ltd. 5 ITD 91

193\. Mr. Syali thereafter very strongly relied on the judgment of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in the case of CIT, AP.I v. Vishakhapatnam Port Trust 144
ITR 146. According to him the important feature of this judgment is that it
was held that in order that a foreign company may be said to have a PE in
India, there must be evidence to show that it had "projected itself in India".
The further feature of this judgment was that after the supply of the parts,
by the foreign company, whatever takes place in India in connection with the
supply, or sale, cannot amount to the existence of a PE. In the present case,
the guarantee was given by the assessee company (page 303 of paper book N0.4)
and the warranties were given by the Indian company to cover "coverage and
services" (page 366 of paper book No. 4). The argument made out was that the
guarantee given by the assessee is only for the sale of the equipment and
nothing beyond and all the other warranties are those of the Indian company.
These facts attract the ratio of the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court
and applying the ratio, it cannot be held that the foreign company projected
itself in India.

194\. Mr. Syali then referred to provisions of the DTAA between India and USA.
According to him, two types of PE were envisaged under the DTAA - (a) where
part of the enterprise was functioning in India, and (b) where there was a
legally separate entity which was acting as an agent of the foreign
enterprise. In the present case, according to him, there was no business at
all carried out by the American company in India and as held by the
CIT(Appeals) there was no agency PE in India also. He emphasized on Article
5.3(c) of the DTAA and stated that the assessee puts its case on this Article
which would apply even if it is held that there is a fixed place of business.
Referring to Article 7, it was contended that though the term "attributed" was
a wider term than the term "derived", yet for the purposes of this provision
of the DTAA, they were equivalent. It was submitted that all the preparatory
or auxiliary services prior to the formation of the supply contract were
carried out by the Indian company under Clause 1.1(1) to (5) of the agreement
(page 146 of paper book No. 2) for which it was remunerated under the
agreement by the foreign company at "cost plus 5%" and thus the Indian company
having been compensated for the services, it is impossible to hold that the
assessee had a permanent establishment in India in the form of the Indian
company.

Ground No. 3-Supply of software.

195\. With regard to this ground, the crux of the issue, according to Mr.
Syali is whether the licensing of the software gives rise to income by way of
"business profits" under Article 7 of the DTAA or to "royalties" under Article
12 of the DTAA. This issue has been discussed in pages 31 to 37 of the order
of the CIT(A). The software is supplied with the hardware. The main ground on
which the CIT(A) has held that the payment amounts to income by way of
royalties is that the software is used by the subscribers to the cell phone or
in other words by the public at large and it is for this use that the amount
is paid to the assessee company and, therefore, it is taxable as royalties.
This view of the CIT(Appeals) is challenged by Mr. Syali on behalf of the
assessee. According to him the exhibit 'F' which is in relation to the supply
of software, a copy of which is placed at page 347 of paper book No. 4, is
part of the purchase agreement and thus the software and the hardware cannot
be separated and go with each other. The view of the CIT(Appeals) that
whenever a cell phone subscriber uses the phone he also uses the software is
incorrect and in this connection strong reliance was placed by him on the
judgment of the Madras High Court in Sky Cell Communications Ltd. and Anr. v.
DCIT 251 ITR 53. On the basis of this decision, it is contended that the cell
phone user merely makes use of the service made available to him and he is not
in any way concerned with the actual working of the equipment. The finding of
the CIT(Appeals) to the effect that the payment made in respect of the
software is based on the number of cell phone subscribers is erroneous. The
CIT(Appeals) has placed reliance on the ruling of the AAR in P.No. 30 of 1999
in re 238 ITR 296 in support of his conclusion. Mr. Syali pointed out that
this judgment has been considered in the order of the Bangalore Bench of the
Tribunal in the case of Lucent Technologies Hindustan Ltd. v. ITO 82 TTJ 163.
Finally, he referred to the suggestions made to revise the OECD Commentary on
this aspect and it was contended that the doctrine of updated construction as
referred to in the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Poddar Cements
Ltd. 226 ITR 625 should be invoked.

Ground No. 4.

196.1. This ground deals with the attribution of profits to the PE and is
taken without prejudice to ground No. 2 which challenges the view of the
Income-tax authorities that the assessee has a PE in India. The argument is
that even if it is held by the Tribunal that there is a PE in India, there is
no material on the basis of which any income can be attributed to the PE and,
therefore, nothing is taxable as the assessee's income. Reference is made to
paragraph 10 at page 45 of the order of the CIT(A) where this issue has been
dealt with by him. It is submitted that the complete accounts were placed
before the A.O. and the CIT(Appeals) and that the assessee merely expressed
its inability to produce a country wise breakup of the operative profits,
which has been made much of by the departmental authorities. It is submitted
that the method adopted by the CIT(Appeals), purported to be under Rule 10(ii)
of the Income-tax Rules, is arbitrary because specific data is available on
the basis of which it can be established that no income can be attributed to
the PE even if one is assumed to exist. For instance it is submitted from page
316 of Paper book No. 4, that the assessee received US $1,27,691 for training
the personnel of the Indian company. When such specific data is available, it
is not proper for the Income-tax authorities to arbitrarily estimate 40% of
the sales as income of the permanent establishment.

196.2. The next submission is that the profits attributable to the PE are
those profits which are "derived" from operations of the PE. Any income which
is derived from a source which is outside India cannot be attributed to the PE
since the source is outside India, and has nothing to do with the PE in India.
For example the warranty income has its source in the sale of equipment. Even
then no income can be said to have arisen because warranties were part of the
sales which took place outside India and in fact there were no operations
carried out by the assessee in India. The effective source is the sale of
equipment which has taken place out of India. According to Mr. Syali, the
obligations of the assessee under the agreement were only four:

(i) training of the personnel of the Indian company in India under Article
4.10 of the agreement.

(ii) To send employees to India to sort out any problems in relation to DOT or
malfunctioning.

(iii) Warranty in relation to the equipment,

(iv) synchronization of the critical path network (CPN).

Mr. Syali submitted that it was not clear from the order of the Income-tax
authorities that which, out of the above obligations, do they consider as
resulting in income which can be said to be "derived" from the PE in India.
Further, at any rate, the estimate of 40% of the revenues as income
attributable to the PE is arbitrary and excessive.

197\. Mr. Syali thereafter submitted that there are guidelines as to the basis
on which income may be attributed to a PE in the following authorities at
which he placed strong reliance:

i) CIT v. Ahmadbhai Umarbhai (48 ITR 472) S.C. (in this case it was held that
the attribution of income to the manufacturing activity should be greater than
the attribution to the sale).

ii) Annamalai Timber Trust & Co. v. CIT 41 ITR 781 (Mad), (in this case only
10% of the income was attributed to the PE).

iii) CIT v. Bertram Scott Ltd. 31 Taxman 444 Cal (10% attributed to PE).

198\. The learned counsel for the assessee also referred to the relevant
clauses in the DTAA with Vietnam, Malaysia and Indonesia which are countries
where the assessee had no operations but had appointed agents under certain
agreements to whom it had paid a commission of 4% to 10% which may give a
broad indication that nothing beyond 10% can be attributed to PE, if at all.

199\. Mr. G.C. Sharma, the learned counsel for the revenue, controverted the
submissions made on behalf of the assessee. We have referred in detail to his
arguments while dealing with the case of Ericsson and, therefore, there is no
need to reproduce them here because the arguments were substantially the same
as he made in the case of Ericsson. However, only one thing needs to be
mentioned specifically i.e. that Mr. Sharma pointed out that while addressing
arguments on behalf of the assessee initially Mr. Syali, the learned counsel
for the assessee, had not raised any arguments on the basis of "business
connection".

200\. In his reply Mr. Syali, the learned counsel for the assessee first
sought to contend that Rule 27 of the Tribunal Rules cannot be invoked in the
case of Motorola in favour of the Department so as to permit them to raise the
issue of the Agency PE, Service PE and Installation PE. It may be recalled
that the CIT(A) has held in the case of Motorola that the foreign company
(assessee) does not have an Agency PE or Service PE or Installation PE. He has
held that the assessee has a fixed place PE in India and no other type of PE.
The objection of Mr. Syali was that the findings of fact cannot be disturbed
by the department by invoking Rule 27 because the rule can be invoked only if
the respondent accepts the finding of fact but seeks relief on some other
aspect of the matter. According to Mr. Syali, each PE is separate and has a
different tax implication and if the department is allowed to invoke Rule 27
and contend that there is either an Agency PE or Service PE or an Installation
PE, the assessee may ultimately be a worse off which cannot be permitted under
Rule 27. In support of this submission he cited the following authorities:

1\. Chaudhary Sahu v. State of Bihar AIR 1982 SC 98

2\. Indira Bala Krishna 39 ITR 546 (SC) at 550.

3\. Banarsi and Ors. v. Ram Phal AIR 2003 SC 1989. (para 21 of the judgment).

201\. In response to the argument of Mr. Sharma that the transaction is in
fact a works contract masquerading as a sale of equipment, Mr. Syali objected
that this was a new plea and even the A.O. has not taken such a plea. On
merits he submitted that this is not a works contract as was made out because
all the seven contracts which the assessee entered into with the Indian
Cellular Operators, are not the same and each is different from the other. In
this connection he pointed out to ground No. 9 of the assessee's appeal where
this has been clarified by the assessee. It was, therefore, submitted that
there is no factual basis to contend that all the three agreements have to be
considered as a whole and an inference of works contract should be drawn. He
further pointed out that nowhere in the contracts has it been mentioned that
it is a turn-key or works contract, that there was no such person as a Project
Manager which would normally be the case if the contract is on turn-key basis
or is a works contract, that the employees of the assessee came to India on
short visits only to supervise whether the equipment was being properly
installed and from all these it was clear that it is not possible to treat all
the three agreements as a whole and conclude that it is a turn key project or
a works contract. Mr. Syali referred in this connection to page No. 295 of the
paper book where the definition of "GSM Cellular System" does not include a
works contract. The definition of "subsidiary" includes only that entity which
provides services or materials in connection with the supply contract and has
nothing to do with the separate supply contract, a copy of which is at page
353. The IOS Agreement a copy is at page 360 shows that "Motorola India" does
not refer to the assessee company at all. All these features of the contracts
would show that there is no basis for the allegation that the contract is a
turn key project or a works contract.

202\. Referring to the written submissions, filed Mr. G.C. Sharma, on which
considerable reliance had been placed by him while making his submissions on
behalf of the Department, especially to para 9(i) of pages 14 and 15 thereof,
the learned counsel for the assessee submitted that this paragraph contains
factually incorrect statements. It was particularly pointed out that the
assessee company did not undertake the installation contract though under
Clause 4.11 of the purchase agreement, a copy of which is at page 301 of paper
book No. 4, it stood guarantee for due and faithfully performance of the
purchase agreement. The guarantee, according to Mr. Syali is only a secondary
contract.

203\. Referring to the warranties and acceptance under the contracts, it was
submitted by Mr. Syali for the assessee that under Clause (vi) of the contract
at page 303 of Paper book No. 4, the warranties are only for SFE and FNE,
which are certain equipment of the cellular system, though the assessee
supplied many other materials under the sale agreement. This warranty is only
for defects in material and workmanship. Mr. Syali invited us to contrast this
feature with the warranty given under the Installation contract (page 366 of
paper book No. 4) which is a coverage warranty which is undertaken by the
installer i.e. Motorola India Ltd. as a functional test. He thus argued that
there was no dovetailing between several contracts and if a contract is
severable it goes against theory of works contract. He further referred to
Clause 21 of the Installation agreement (page 370 of paper book No. 4) and
Clause 25 of the Supply agreement (page 312 of paper Book No. 4) in support of
his claim that the contracts were severable and cannot be read as an
integrated whole.

204\. Turning to the provision in relation to warehousing of the equipment,
Mr. Syali submitted that it is not relevant to find out if all the contracts
amount to a works contract. The warehousing, according to the relevant clauses
of the agreement (page 308 of paper book No. 4) is not the responsibility of
the assessee at all. If the equipment were to be sent before the DOT site is
ready, only then the warehousing of the equipment will be the responsibility
of the assessee.

205\. In support of the argument that the three different contracts cannot be
read as an integrated whole to contend that they constitute a works contract,
Mr. Syali relied on the following authorities:

1\. State of Rajasthan v. Man Industrial Corporation AIR 1969 SC 1245.

2\. Vanguard Rolling Shutters v. S.T. Commissioner AIR 1977 SC 1505,

3\. Hindustan Aeronautical Ltd. AIR 1984 SC 744.

It was submitted that in these judgments, several criteria were laid down to
find out whether certain contracts could be regarded as constituting a works
contract and none of these criteria is satisfied in the present case. It was
pointed out that it has been held specifically that if there is a separate
contract for transfer of title (in the equipment) for a price and property
passes therein, that cannot be considered as a works contract. In the present
case, according to Mr. Syali this test satisfied and, therefore, the theory of
works contract should not be accepted.

206\. Turning to the question of tax avoidance or evasion, a point which was
raised by Mr. Sharma on behalf of the Department, Mr. Syali submitted that
Under Section 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act, no oral evidence may be admitted
by the Court which is contrary to the averments contained in a written
document and that a written contract cannot be ignored and a different
contract between the parties be spelt out by the Court. Mr. Syali in this
connection referred to the following authorities:

1\. Re Poly Pack International PLC (in Admn.) (1996) 2 All ER. 433.

2\. CIT v. Motor & Gen. Stores Ltd. 66 ITR 692 (SC).

3\. CIT v. B.M. Kharwar 72 ITR 603 and

4\. ITO v. Shriram Bearings Ltd. 164 ITR 419 (Cal) affirmed in 224 ITR 724
(SC).

It was submitted on the basis of the above authorities that it is the legal
substance of the transaction and not the economic substance that has to be
examined. It was also pointed out that the CIT(A) in the present case has
found that the A.O. has not raised the question of tax avoidance or evasion,
but still the Department seeks to raise the plea before the Tribunal which
should not be permitted.

207\. With regard to the judgment of the Italian Court of Cassation in the
case of Phillip Moris, Mr. Syali pointed out to certain portions of the
judgment where the legal principles laid down by the lower court were affirmed
by the Italian Supreme Court and the decision ultimately went in favour of the
revenue in that case only because of the facts. It was pointed out that: the
legal principles to be adopted are in no way different in India in the case of
double tax agreement.

208\. So far as "business connection'' is concerned, Mr. Syali raised a few
submissions though he did not specifically answer the point raised by Mr.
Sharma that this aspect of the matter had not been argued by him originally.
Be that as it may, the submission of Mr. Syali with reference to para (c) of
page 4 of the written submissions of Mr. G.C. Sharma was that the assessee was
not responsible to set up the GSM system which was done by a separate
installer, that the assessee's obligation was only to supply the equipment for
the GSM system and it merely stood guarantee for the due and faithful
performance of the installation and from this it cannot be inferred that there
was any business connection between the assessee and India. He submitted that
there were no other operations which were carried on by the assessee company
in India and in order that anything is taxable on the basis of business
connection, there should be not only a business connection but there should
also be certain operations carried out by the foreign company in India and
unless such operations are pointed out by the Income-tax authorities, no
income can be taxed merely on the basis of a theoretical business connection.
In this connection, Mr. Syali strongly relied on the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of Carborandum Co. 108 ITR 335. He emphatically denied that
the subsidiary in India (Motorola India Ltd.) was the agent of the assessee.

209\. As regards the question of "royalty", the only argument of Mr. Syali was
that the payment was not linked at all to the number of subscribers and on
this aspect as well as on other features, the facts of Motorola were the same
as the facts in the case of Ericsson.

210\. Coming to the aspect of "attribution of income" to the PE, Mr. Syali
submitted that when the A.O. had made the attribution he had 4 PEs in mind.
However, ultimately only one PE was upheld by the CIT(Appeals) and hence at
the most 10% of the sales can be attributed to Indian operations. Even that
would not make the income taxable according to Mr. Syali because almost 15% of
commission was paid Further it was pointed out that as per the overall global
accounts, the assesse had earned profits only to the extent of 33% and hence
there was no basis to adopt the rate of 42% of profit in cellular products.
There was no warrant for the A.O. to increase the profit from 33% to 42%,
Therefore, even if 33% is taken, considering the fact that it involved the
manufacturing of high tech products, research in these products, trial runs
etc. which activities were all out of India and when the sales were also
outside India, nothing can be deemed to have accrued as income to the assessee
in India. If at all some income has to be attributed, at best it can be 10% as
was in the case of Annamalai Timber Trust Co. (supra) i.e. 3.3% of global
profits. If 15% is already paid then the liability of the assessee stood
extinguished. No separate profit was required to be attributed as regards
supply of software because it was integrated with the hardware. Even if this
argument was rejected, then as per Article 12.6 of DTAA read with Article 7.5,
since there are no assets and activities of the assessee in India, nothing can
be said to have been "derived" from those assets or activities. Therefore in
any event no income was taxable in the hands of the assessee.

211\. In the department's appeal in the case of Motorola, the first ground
relates to attribution of appropriate profits to the PE. In this connection,
the main contention of Mr. Sharma was that the A.O. had applied Rule 10(i) of
the Income-tax Rules for the purpose of attribution. On the other hand, the
CIT(Appeals) had applied Rule 10(ii) for the apportionment of appropriate
profits. According to Mr. Sharma Rule 10(iii) permitted the assessing
authorities to make apportionment as may be deemed suitable. Therefore, his
argument was that there was no standard formula for applying any particular
rule and while applying Rule 10(ii) CIT(A) did not consider the ratio of the
receipts. Therefore, Rule 10(i) as applied by the A.O. was quite fair but
ultimately since there was no standard formula, he left this matter to the
Bench.

212\. The second ground in the departmental appeal relates to the levy of
interest under Sections 234A and 234B and the arguments in this connection are
the same as they were in the case of Ericsson.

213\. In the appeal by the Department, so for as first ground is concerned,
Mr. Syali appearing for the assessee submitted that Section 9(1)(i) used the
word "attributable" in explanation (a) below the section. He emphasized that
the word used was not "derived" which is of wider import and, therefore, a
strict interpretation of the principles of attribution is called for. The
situs of the sale of the equipment was not in India and this also has to be
kept in mind while attributing any income to the PE. According to him Rule 10
cannot go beyond the provisions of Section 9(1)(i). The CIT(A) was wrong in
his interpretation of Rule 10(ii), Rule 10 does not take care of the language
of explanation 2(a) below Section 9. Therefore, according to Mr. Syali
whatever is determined under Rule 10(ii) has to be further apportioned to the
Indian operations under the provisions of Explanation 2(a) below Section 9. It
is necessary to clarify here that both the parties are aggrieved by the
apportionment made by the CIT(A) by invoking Rule 10(ii) whereas the
Department wants apportionment made by the AO to be restored. The assessee
wants that the apportionment made by the CIT(A) by invoking Rule 10(ii) though
correct in principle, the CIT(A) was wrong in his interpretation of the Rule
which does not take care of the language used in Explanation 2(a) below
Section 9.

214\. At this juncture, the Bench called upon the learned counsel for the
assessee to explain the working of Rule 10(ii) of the Income-tax Rules by
giving concrete examples so that the point made may be appreciated better. Mr.
Farooq Irani, the learned counsel appearing for Motorola alongwith Mr. Syali,
lucidly explained, with illustrations, as to how the Rule actually work and
also explained the rule with reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of CIT v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhai (supra). We shall refer to his
explanation of the rule at the appropriate juncture.

MOTOROLA DECISION

215\. The first ground in the assessee's appeal relates to the validity of the
notice issued Under Section 142(1) of the Income-tax Act on 3.11.1999 and the
validity of the assessment made in consequence thereto. According to the
assessee the notice ought to have been issued on or before 31.3.1998 which is
the last date of the assessment year concerned or alternatively that it should
have been issued at any rate on or before 31.3.1999, which is the expiry of
the period of one year from the end of the assessment year, within which
period the assessee has been given the right to file a return Under Section
139(4). The contention is that since the notice has been issued beyond both
the above dates, it is invalid as also the assessment made pursuant thereto.
In short the contention is substantially the same as that taken by the
assessee in the case of Ericsson. While disposing of this contention in the
case of Ericsson, we have elaborately given reasons for our decision which is
to the effect that the notice ought to be issued before the close of the
relevant assessment year. We have discussed the facts of Ericsson as well as
the facts of Motorola while dealing with this contention. There is, therefore,
no need to repeat them in detail here. For the reasons given in the case of
Ericsson, we hold that the notice issued in the case of Motorola Under Section
142(1) is beyond the time prescribed by law. Hence both the notice as well as
the assessment made pursuant thereto are invalid. Accordingly, ground No. 1 is
allowed.

216\. The above ground is sufficient to dispose of the entire appeal of
Motorola in ITA No. 2455/Del/2001. However, for the sake of completeness and
since important issues are involved in the appeal and also in deference to the
elaborate arguments addressed before us by both the sides, we would prefer to
give our decision on all the grounds raised by the assessee as we have done in
the case of Ericsson. Accordingly we proceed to consider the other grounds
raised by the assessee in this appeal.

217\. The 2nd ground relates to the question of Permanent Establishment.
According to the Assessing Officer, the assessee had a PE in India as follows:

1) Fixed place PE in the form of the Indian company namely Motorola India Ltd.
(MINL),

2) Installation PE,

3) Service PE, and

4) Dependent Agent PE.

Though the A.O. held that the assessee had PEs in India as above, on appeal,
the CIT (Appeals has held that the assessee had only fixed place PE, within
the meaning of Article 5.1 of the DTAA between India and U.S. He has held that
the assessee cannot be said to have the Other 3 types of PEs as held by the
A.O. The Department has accepted this position and has not taken any ground
against this finding of the CIT (Appeals) in its appeal No. ITA 2516/Del/2001.
Therefore, the question which remains for our consideration arises only in the
assessee's appeal wherein in ground No. 2, the assessee has challenged the
finding of the CIT (Appeals) that there is a fixed place PE in India in the
form of the office of MINL in India. We address ourselves to this question and
proceed to consider the same in the following paragraphs.

218\. Article 5.1 of the DTAA says that "for the purposes of this convention
the term "Permanent Establishment" means a fixed place of business through
which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on." In the
present case the finding of the CIT (Appeals) is to the effect that the office
of the Indian company, namely, MINL functions as the fixed place of business
of the assessee. In support of this finding, the CIT (Appeals) has held that
the assessee periodically sent its employees to MINL, that these employees
were paid perquisites by MINL though the salary was paid by the assessee, that
the perquisites were not reimbursed by the assessee to MINL, that the
employees were under the control of the assessee and that they undertook
activities on the part of "the appellant also through the office of IC". By
IC, the CIT (Appeals) means the Indian Company which is MINL. The CIT
(Appeals) has in the alternative held that MINL was technically dependent upon
the employees of the assessee and also economically dependent on the assessee
because no salaries were paid by it to the employees seconded by the assessee
to it. He, therefore, held that the assessee had a fixed place PE in India "in
the form of the office of the IC." The CIT (Appeals) has also recorded a
finding that the assessee undertook sales and connected activities through
MINL's office in India within the meaning of Article 5.2. He has, however,
held that it will not be a service PE as contended by the A.O. Thus it appears
that the only definite finding of the CIT (Appeals) is that the assessee had a
permanent establishment in India in the form of the office of MINL in India
and thus had a PE within the meaning of Article 5.1 of the DTAA. We are
assuming that the entire Article 5.2 has been ruled out by him.

219\. The contention of the assessee very briefly is that in order to satisfy
the conditions of Article 5.1, the business of the U.S. company has to be
carried on in India through its employees but if the employees carry on the
business of other companies, then the office of the other companies cannot be
considered as the PE of the U.S. company. In other words the learned counsel
for the assessee drew our attention to the observation of the CIT (Appeals)
towards the end of para 6.4 at page 25 of the order in which he has recorded a
finding that the employees sent by the assessee to India undertook activities
on the part of "the appellant also" (underline ours) through the office of
MINL and submitted that the finding really means that the assessee's employees
were, not only attending the work of MINL in India but also attending to the
activities of the assessee which is not sufficient to attract Article 5.1.
Considerable emphasis was placed on the use of the word "also" in the above
sentence of the CIT (Appeals). In other words what the assessee contends is
that its employees should exclusively work for the assessee only so that the
office of MINL could be considered as a fixed place PE of the assessee in
India.

220\. It is a little difficult to accept the above submission on the facts of
the present case. The employees were paid salaries by the assessee company
and, therefore, prima facie it would appear that they worked only for the
assessee company in India. They have also used the office of the MINL in India
to carry on the work of the assessee company and thus there is a projection of
the assessee company in India in the office of MINL which makes the latter a
fixed place PE. The fact that the employees of the assessee were paid
perquisites by MINL and that these perquisites were not disallowed in the
assessment of MINL from which it was contended that the Department itself
accepted that the employees work for MINL is not conclusive. It seems to us
that an employee is normally allowed perquisites only in the place where he
actually stays and works and it may be for such a practical reason that it was
arranged between the assessee and MINL that the latter would pay the
perquisites to the assessee's employees, while the salaries would be paid by
the assessee itself.

221\. The further argument that if the employees paid by MINL in connection
with the purchase agreement were carrying on only the assessee's activities in
India, then there was no need for the assessee to send more persons to India
periodically, is based on the theory of preponderance of probabilities and not
on any facts. It cannot, therefore, be accepted without further evidence. It
was further argued before us that the A.O. has omitted to make enquiries with
the Reserve Bank of India and other concerned statutory authorities as to the
purpose for which the expatriate employees came to India and in this
connection, it was pointed out that the expatriates are required to fill up
the statutory form showing the purpose of their visit which could have thrown
much light on the subject. These aspects have not been gone into by the A.O,
no doubt but the mere deficiency in the line of enquiry cannot take the
assessee's case further. The fact remains that the salaries were paid by the
assessee and the employees also came and worked in the office of MINL in
India, enjoyed perquisites from MINL without any disallowance in the hands of
MINL and thus there is prima facie material to show that the office of MINL
could be considered as a projection of the assessee in India.

222\. A question may arise as to how the position in the case of Motorola is
different from the factual position in the case of Ericsson where we have held
that the Indian company (ECI) cannot be considered as the fixed place PE of
Ericsson in India. It may be recalled that in the case of Ericsson, the
argument was that the employees of Ericsson, Swedish company, had no right to
enter the office of ECI in India for the purpose of carrying out the
activities of the Swedish company. It was only the facility offered by ECI to
the employees of Ericsson gratis that they could enter the office of ECI for
the work of Ericsson. That did not create any right in favour of the employees
of Ericsson to enter the office of ECI as they pleased for the purpose of
carrying out the activities of Ericsson. Nor did it create any impression in
the minds of the business customers of Ericsson in India that the office of
ECI could be viewed as a projection of Ericsson's activities in India. There
was also no allegation in the case of Ericsson to the effect that the
employees of Ericsson worked for ECI also so that it could be said that they
could, as a matter of right, enter the office of ECI and thereafter could
perform some of the activities of Ericsson also. In the case of Motorola,
however, the case has proceeded on the basis of an admitted position that the
employees of Motorola have worked both for Motorola as well as MINL. There is
no denial by Motorola that its employees had a right to enter the office of
MINL in India either for the purpose of working for MINL or for the purpose of
working for Motorola. This also finds support from the fact, which we consider
crucial, that MINL provided perquisites to the employees of Motorola whereas
Motorola paid the salaries. This arrangement creates an impression that for
that part of the work carried out by the employees of Motorola for Motorola,
they were paid salaries by Motorola and for that part of the work which they
performed for MINL, they were paid perquisites by MINL. Such an arrangement
cannot be considered to be unusual and strengthens the claim of the A.O. that
the employees had some sort of a right to enter the office of MINL and the
business customers of the assessee in India could also look upon the office of
MINL as a projection in India of Motorola. It is also worth noting that the
A.O. has relied on the fact that MINL was being reimbursed by Motorola on the
basis of "cost plus 5% thereof which covers even the perquisites given by MINL
to the employees. This factual position throws doubt even on the claim of the
assessee that the perquisites were paid to the employees of Motorola only for
their work for MINL and that is why in the assessment of MINL, the perquisites
were not disallowed. The fact that the entire expenses incurred by MINL were
being reimbursed on cost plus 5% basis strengthens the case of the Department
that the employees did work only for the assessee in India. The unguarded
observation of the CIT (Appeals) towards the end of paragraph 6.4 of his order
at page 25 thereof that the employees of the assessee undertook activities on
the part of "the appellant also", which has been made much on behalf of the
assessee before us, does not take the case of the assessee any further. From
the fact that the entire expenditure incurred by MINL was reimbursed by
Motorola on cost plus 5% basis it could even be inferred, as was done by the
A.O., that the employees took no part in the activities of MINL. Be that as it
may and without feeling the need for examining the issue in more detail, we
are satisfied that there was a projection of the assessee in India in the form
of the place of business of MINL and thus there was a fixed place PE of the
assessee in India within the meaning of Article 5.1 of the DTAA between India
and U.S.

223\. The alternative argument of the learned counsel for the assessee was
that even if we were to, hold that there is a fixed place PE within the
meaning of Article 5.1, the maintenance of such a fixed place of business was
only for "other activities which have a preparatory or auxiliary character,
for the enterprise" within the meaning of Article 5.3(e) of the DTAA and,
therefore, under the negative deeming provisions thereof, the office of MINL
cannot be deemed to be a fixed place of assessee's business. Article 5.3 says
that "notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, the term
"permanent establishment" shall be deemed not to include" the maintenance of a
fixed place of business solely for the purpose of advertising, for the supply
of information, for scientific research or for other activities which have a
preparatory or auxiliary character, for the enterprise. The contention of the
assessee is that the activities carried on by MINL for Motorola are of
preparatory or auxiliary character. Reliance is placed on Clauses (1) to (5)
of Article 1.1 of the Services Agreement entered into on 1.4.1996 between the
assessee and MINL. The nature of the obligations of MINL have been elaborated
in these clauses as under:

"Article 1 Duties of MINL 1.1 MINL undertakes the obligation to perform the
following services (the "Services") in India to MINC and its affiliated
companies (hereinafter referred to jointly as "Motorola"):

(1) Engage in market survey, industry analysis, economy evaluation,
development of business opportunity, investment, joint venture and technology
cooperation and interface with potential business partners and with local
government agencies on industrial policy and regulations.

(2) Provide product information and training to distributors and OEMs, assist
distributors to provide potential equipment users with technical and price
information, ensure that distributors meet warranty obligations, and maintain
technical standards consistent with the high quality, reliability and state of
art technology of Motorola equipment, assist distributors to make technical
presentations to potential users, act as an interface between Motorola and end
users in dealing with issues of technical performance of equipment, selection
of equipment or price pf equipment.

(3) Develop market opportunities for Motorola products and services by
introducing Motorola products and services and by providing product and
service information to potential customers and partners in liaison and support
of Motorola and provide warranty and after sales services in connection with
the products sold.

(4) Engage in sourcing and procurement activity on behalf of Motorola for raw
materials or components to be incorporated or used in conjunction with
products manufactured on a worldwide basis.

(5) Corporate Finance and Accounting Services."

On the basis of above clauses in the Services Agreement, it is contended that
the activities of MINC are only preparatory or auxiliary in character and,
therefore, the office of MINL in India cannot be deemed to be a fixed place PE
of the assessee.

224\. We see force in the contention, taken in the alternative. The activities
described in the clauses, of the Services Agreement do show that they are
basic operations to be carried out by MINL before the business actually starts
such as market survey, industry analysis, economy evaluation, furnishing of
product information, ensuring distributorship and their warranty obligation,
ensuring technical presentations to potential users, development of market
opportunities, providing services and support information, procurement of raw
materials for Motorola and accounting and finance services etc. These are by
all means only activities of preparatory or auxiliary character before the
commencement of actual business of Motorola in India. These activities cannot
be considered as activities in the course of the carrying on of the business
by Motorola in India, but they are anterior thereto. This is also made clear
by Article 7 of the Services Agreement which says that the agreement shall
remain in force only upto 31.3.1997. The duration of the agreement itself is
strong indication of the fact that the activities are prior to the
commencement of business activities and are only basic or preparatory in
nature. MINL has to perform these activities only for a period of one year.
Once the agreement comes to an end there is no obligation on the part of MINL
to perform the above activities. In these circumstances, we hold that the
office of MINL in India is a fixed place PE of the assessee in terms of
Article 5.1 of the DTAA but cannot be deemed to be so by virtue of Article
5.3(e) of the DTAA. Ground No. 2 is accordingly allowed.

225\. The next ground namely ground No. 3 relates to the characterization of
the revenues relatable to the supply of software. The Income-tax authorities
have held the payment to be royalty within the meaning of Section 9(1)(vi) of
the Act and have brought the same to tax accordingly @ 30% on gross basis. The
total value of the software has been taken in the assessment at U.S. Dollors
6.33 million which converted into Indian rupee's comes to Rs. 22,88,29,500.
The tax thereon at 30% has been computed at Rs. 6,86,48,850.

226\. Basically the rival contentions are substantially the same as in the
case of Ericsson which we have dealt with earlier. According to the
Department, royalties have to be assessed under Article 12 of the DTAA. If
they are to be taxed as business profits under Article 7, the existence of a
PE of Motorola in India is essential. We have already seen that the assessee
does not have a PE in India within the meaning of Article 5. Therefore, the
question for consideration is only whether Article 12 can be applied and the
royalties be taxed in the hands of the assessee on gross basis @ 30% as has
been done by the Income-tax authorities. The facts are substantially the same
as in the case of Ericsson. There is no substantial difference, except
cosmetic differences, in the wording of the agreements entered into between
the assessee and the cellular operators. It was common ground between the
parties that this is so. Therefore, the decision which we have rendered in the
case of Ericsson applies squarely to this ground taken by the assessee.
Accordingly we hold that the payment for the software cannot be termed as
royalties within the meaning of Article 12 of the DTAA.

227\. We may, however, briefly notice the order of the CIT(Appeals) in the
present case since he has worded his order in a slightly different manner. In
the case of Ericsson, he has held that apart of the software supplied by
Ericsson is loaded into the handsets of the subscribers which we found to be
factually wrong. In the present case (Motorola) he has held that when a
subscriber makes a call through the GSM he makes use of the software of the
assessee embedded in the hardware of the cellular operators and without which
no connectivity with other persons will be feasible. He has further held that
such use is made without any human intervention on the part of the assessee
because after providing connectivity the software of the GSM becomes available
to the subscribers of the cellular operators without any intervention on the
part of the cellular operator. For these reasons, he has held that "there is a
use of the software of the GSM by third parties also, namely, the customers."
In our opinion, this is only a slightly different manner of saying the same
thing which the CIT (Appeals) said in the case of Ericsson. Whereas in the
case of Ericsson he held that the software is embedded in the handset itself
which is used by the subscribers, in the case of Motorola he has held, without
expressly giving a finding that the software is loaded on to the handset used
by the subscriber, that the subscriber uses the software embedded in the
hardware in order to get connectivity. Despite the slight difference in the
language or the phraseology employed by the CIT, there is in substance no
difference to what he really wants to convey which is that the subscribers
used the software supplied by the assessee. We do not see any justification to
take a view different from the view taken by us in the case of Ericsson merely
because of the difference in phraseology or language employed by the CIT
(Appeals) to denote the same thing, namely, that the subscriber uses the
software. In the case of Ericsson we had held that the subscriber merely gets
connectivity by using the facilities provided in the handset and that finding
applies equally to the present case. In this connection, we may briefly notice
one or two authorities which were cited before us. The first decision is that
of the Bangalore Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Lucent Technologies v.
ITO 82 TTJ(Bang) 163. This case was cited because it has dealt with the
decision of the Authority for Advance Ruling in the case of 'Y' reported in
238 ITR 296, which has been relied on by the CIT (Appeals) in the present
case. We have gone through this decision where it has been held that both the
software and the hardware constitute an integrated equipment and that one
cannot function without the help of the other. The order refers to the
decision of the AAR cited above and has referred to the argument of the
assessee in that case that the payment cannot be considered as royalty because
it has been made not for a copyright but for a copyrighted article.

228\. The next decision cited before us was that of the Madras High Court in
the case of Skycell Communications Ltd. and Anr. v. Dy. CIT and Ors. 251 ITR
53. This case is important since it throws light on certain basic principles
involved. In that case the Madras High Court was concerned with the expression
"fees for technical services" used in Section 194J read with Explanation 2
below Section 9(1)(vii) of the Income-tax Act. The Petitioner before the High
Court was engaged in the business of providing cellular mobile telephone
facility to subscribers. The payments made to them by their subscribers were
held by, the Chief CIT to constitute fees for technical services provided by
the assessee to them and he directed that the firms and companies which
subscribed to the petitioner's network had to deduct tax at source on the
payments made by them to the petitioner. The contention of the petitioner was
that when the subscriber subscribed to the mobile telephone facility provided
by it, the subscriber was actually obtaining a service for a fee and such fee
cannot by any stretch of imagination be considered as fees for technical
services. It was contended that the subscriber obtained the mobile telephone
facility and he was not interested in knowing how that service was provided to
him and that what were all the technical features or steps involved in such
service being provided to him. This case, with great respect, lays down very
basic principles regarding the nature of the payment made by the subscribers
to mobile operator. A very clinching example given is that of a person who
hires a taxi to move from one place to another. The Hon'ble High Court held
that the person who hires the taxi pays for the taxi service as such and is
not concerned with the technical operation or each and every part of the Taxi.
It was held that the person hiring the taxi was not paying the taxi fare as
fees for having any technical service rendered to him. It would be better to
reproduce the relevant portion of the judgment (page 57 & 58):

"In the modern day world, almost every facet of one's life is linked to
science and technology inasmuch as numerous things used or relied upon in
every day life is the result of scientific and technological development.
Every instrument or gadget that is used to make life easier is the result of
scientific invention or development and involves the use of technology. On
that score, every provider of every instrument or facility used by a person
cannot be regarded as providing technical service.

When a person hires a taxi to move from one place to another, he uses a
product of science and technology, viz., an automobile. It cannot on that
ground be said that the taxi driver, who controls the vehicle, and monitors
its movement is rendering a technical service to the person who uses the
automobile. Similarly, when a person travels by train or in an aeroplane, it
cannot be said that the railways or airlines is rendering a technical service
to the passenger and, therefore, the passenger is under an obligation to
deduct tax at source on the payments made to the railway or the airline for
having used it for traveling from one destination to another. When a person
travels by bus, it cannot be said that the undertaking which owns the bus
service is rendering technical service to the passenger and, therefore, the
passenger must deduct tax at source on the payment made to the bus service
provider, for having used the bus. The electricity supplied to a consumer
cannot, on the ground that generators are used to generate electricity,
transmission lines to carry the power, transformers to regulate the flow of
current, meters to measure the consumption, be regarded as amounting to
provision of technical services to the consumer resulting in the consumer
having to deduct tax at source on the payment made for the power consumed and
remit the same to the Revenue.

Satellite television has become ubiquitous, and is spreading its area and
coverage, and covers millions of homes. When a person receives such
transmission of television signals through the cable provided by the cable
operator, it cannot be said that the home owner who has such a cable
connection is receiving a technical service for which he is required to deduct
tax at source on the payments made to the cable operator."

With reference to a subscriber to cellular phone service, the Hon'ble High
Court held as under:

"When a person decides to subscribe to a cellular telephone service in order
to have the facility of being able to communicate with others, he does not
contract to receive a technical service. What he does agree to is to pay for
the use of the airtime for which he pays a charge. The fact that the telephone
service provider has installed sophisticated technical equipment in the
exchange to ensure connectivity to its subscriber, does not on that score,
make it provision of a technical service to the subscriber. The subscriber is
not concerned with the complexity of the equipment installed in the exchange,
or the location of the base station. All that he wants is the facility of
using the telephone when he wishes to, and being able to get connected to the
person at the number to which he desires to be connected. What applies to
cellular mobile telephone is also applicable in fixed telephone service.
Neither service can be regarded as "technical service" for the purpose of
Section 194J of the Act."

The above judgment clearly brings out the fallacy in the reasoning adopted by
the CIT (Appeals) in the present case. The subscriber to the mobile telephone
service pays for the service as a whole and he is not concerned with whether
he gets the connectivity through the hardware or through the software or what
are the technical aspects or steps involved in obtaining the connectivity.
Therefore, the conclusion of the CIT (Appeals) that the subscriber paid for
the use of the software is, with respect, misconceived.

229\. For the above reasons, we hold that the payment for the software cannot
be taxed under Article 12 of the Indo -U.S. DTAA as royalties. The ground is
allowed.

Ground Nos. 5 & 6\.

230\. We may now take up for consideration ground Nos. 5 & 6 of the appeal
under the head "accrual of income" and "business connection" respectively. The
Income-tax authorities, with reference to these grounds, have discussed the
assessee's contracts with Sterling Cellular Ltd. and Usha Martin Telecom Ltd.
They have not discussed the terms of the other contracts and the appeals also
proceeded on the basis that these two agreements are representative of all the
agreements which the assessee entered into with various cellular operators.
These two agreements were made in January and March, 1995. It was common
ground between the assessee and the Department before us that the agreements
in substance contained the same terms and conditions as in the case of
Ericsson. Our decision is also based on this common ground. We have already
held in the case of Ericsson that there is no business connection in India, on
an examination of the various agreements entered into in that case. Since
admittedly the terms and conditions of the agreements are substantially the
same in the case of Motorola also, the same decision would hold good.

231\. The only question which was argued before us in respect of these two
grounds is whether the fact that in the case of Motorola, the risk in the GSM
equipment was to pass in India on delivery though the title to the equipment
passed in USA, would make any difference to the position and would result in
the consequence that the assessee can be held to have a business connection in
India. Under Clause 13.1 of the agreement between the assessee and Sterling
Cellular Ltd. admittedly the title to the equipment passed outside India.
Under the same clause, the risk passed in India. The finding of the
CIT(Appeals) in paragraph 8.1 of his order to the effect that the property in
the equipment also passed in India at site and not in America is not borne out
by the contract entered into between the parties. As rightly contended on
behalf of the assessee, this finding is contrary to the factual position. The
contention of the assessee is that the passing of the risk in India on
delivery is a wholly irrelevant or immaterial consideration while deciding the
question as to whether there was a business connection. According to the
assessee so long as the title or property passed outside India, irrespective
of whether the risk continued to be with the assessee, no business connection
can be established and, therefore, no income can be deemed to accrue or arise
in India, within the meaning of Section 9(1)(i) of the Income-tax Act. Our
attention in this connection was drawn to the relevant provisions of the Sale
of Goods Act, 1930 where a distinction has been made between the passing of
the title and the passing of the risk. A reading of Sections 26 and 40 of the
aforesaid Act shows that the passing of the title and the passing of the risk
need not be simultaneous; they can be effected at different points of time.
Section 26 says that the goods remain at the seller's risk until the property
therein is transferred to the buyer, but the parties can agree to the contrary
with the result that even before the title to the goods passes, the buyer can
undertake the risk. The section further says that when the property in the
goods is transferred to the buyer, the goods are at the buyer's risk whether
delivery has been made or not. This, of course, is subject to Section 40 which
deals with risk where goods are delivered at a distant place as in the present
case. This section says that where the seller agrees to deliver the goods at
his own risk at a place other than where they were when sold, the buyer shall
normally take any risk of deterioration in the goods necessarily incident to
the course of transit. So far, this is in conformity with Section 26 which
says that after the property in the goods is transferred, the goods are at the
buyer's risk. However, Section 40 further says that it is open to the parties
to agree that even where the property in the goods has passed, the seller may
undertake the risk of deterioration in the goods necessarily incident to the
course of transit. This is what the parties in the present case have
undertaken in the sense that though the title to the GSM equipment passed in
USA, the risk continued to remain with the assessee (seller) and the risk
passed to the cellular operator only on delivery in India. Therefore, the
result is that merely because the risk passed in India, it cannot be said that
the sale took place in India. Therefore, no income can be said to have arisen
in India.

232\. So far as the signing of the contracts is concerned, in the present case
also they were all signed in India as in the case of Ericsson. The contention
of the Department based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in 20th Century
Finance Corpn. (supra) that income accrued in India on account of the signing
of the contracts in India has been considered by us in the case of Ericsson
and we have held that mere signing of the contracts in India does not give
rise to any income in India. In the present case also the CIT (Appeals) has
heavily relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court cited above and the
assessee has specifically challenged the applicability of the decision to its
case. This judgment has been considered by us in detail while deciding the
case of Ericsson and for the same reasons, we hold that this judgment cannot
be of any assistance to the Department to contend that income accrued in India
on account of the signing of the contracts in India.

233\. Similarly, the question as to the impact of the Acceptance Test on the
accrual of income in India has been considered by us while deciding the case
of Ericsson. The Department in the case of Motorola also has relied on the
fact that Acceptance Test to be carried out in India makes the sale
conditional and the sale gets completed only after the Test is accepted and
the sale gets complete only in India and, therefore, income accrues or arises
in India out of the sale of the equipment. We have discussed this point also
while deciding the case of Ericsson and therein we have noted that in case the
GSM equipment does not pass the Acceptance Test, the sale is not repudiated
and the assessee is liable to replace the equipment in order to conform to the
standards set by DOT. In other words what in effect we have held is that the
sale was outside India and the assessee's responsibility continued there-under
which includes replacement of the equipment under the same sale contract. In
line with our view taken in the case of Ericsson, we hold that in the present
case also, where the terms of the contract are the same, the fact that the GSM
equipment has to pass the Acceptance Test does not mean that the sale is
completed only in India.

234\. On behalf of the assessee another contention raised before us was that
Under Section 39 of the Sale of Goods Act wherein pursuant to a contract of
sale, the seller is authorized or required to send the goods to the buyer, the
delivery of the goods to a carrier whether named by the buyer or not, for the
purpose of transmission to the buyer is prima facie deemed to be a delivery of
the goods to the buyer. It was submitted that in the present case Sub-section
(1) of Section 39 is satisfied. Our attention was drawn to the written
submissions filed before the CIT (Appeals) (dated 15.2.2001 at pages 102 to
113 of paper book No. 1) and it was pointed out that the assessee has
contended in these written submissions that the bills of lading are in the
name of the customer (not the assessee) and the assessee did not reserve any
right of disposal over the equipment. Further almost 70% of the price of the
equipment was payable on delivery of the equipment to the carrier. Thus
substantially the contract of sale was concluded outside India. The result is
that as held by the Supreme Court in the case of Mahabir Commercial Co. Ltd.
v. CIT, W.B. (1972) 86 ITR 417, the property in the goods passes once the
documents are tendered by the seller to the buyer or his agent as required
under the contract. All this has happened outside India and thus the sale
itself got completed outside India. Whatever obligations which the assessee
had to undertake in India were only incidental to the sale which took place
outside India. These facts also go to show that the sale is completed outside
India.

235\. Ground No. 6 in the appeal is that the CIT (Appeals) erred in holding
that there was a business connection in India within the meaning of Section
9(1)(i) of the Income-tax Act and therefore, any income accruing through such
business connection should be brought to tax in India. We have already held,
while discussing the question of PE of the assessee in India, that the Indian
company, namely, Motorola India Ltd. (MINL) carried out certain preparatory
and auxiliary activities in India for the assessee. We also held that there
was a virtual projection of the assessee in India through the Indian company
and thus there was a PE in India. However, by virtue of Article 5.3 of the
DTAA, we further held that just because the Indian company carried out certain
preparatory and auxiliary activities, its office cannot be considered as the
PE of the assessee in India This was because of the deeming provision in the
aforesaid Article. However, the fact remains that certain activities of a
preparatory and auxiliary character were carried out by MINL in India for the
assessee. The further finding of ours that there was a virtual projection of
the assessee in India through the office of MINL also remains, though because
of the deeming provision of Article 5.3 we had to hold that the office of the
Indian company cannot be considered as the PE of the assessee. These facts,
though they are insufficient to hold, because of the deeming provisions of
Article 5.3 of the DTAA, that there is a PE in India, they are, in our
opinion, sufficient to hold that there is a business connection in India
through which income can be deemed to accrue to the assessee. These facts do
not get obliterated just because of the deeming provision relating to PE.
Moreover, there is no such deeming provision in the case of business
connection in Section 9(1)(i) of the Act to the effect that these activities
are not sufficient to constitute a business connection. Therefore, we have to
hold that there is a business connection in India.

236\. Here again it would be appropriate to distinguish our decision in the
case of Ericsson with regard to business connection. In that case we have held
that there is no business connection in India. The reason for our view is that
the Indian company in the case of Ericsson (ECI) did not carry out any
activities on behalf of Ericsson. Nor was there any evidence or finding by the
Income-tax authorities to show that ECI carried out any activities on behalf
of the assessee. In the case of Ericsson, we have also held that business
connection cannot arise merely because the employees of Ericsson came to
India. That finding holds good in the case of Motorola also. In other words
merely because the employees of Motorola visited India it cannot be said that
there is a business connection. However, the ground on which we are holding
that there is a business connection in the case of Motorola is that the Indian
company namely MINL carried out several activities on behalf of the assessee
and notwithstanding that those activities were of a preparatory or auxiliary
character, they are sufficient to establish a business connection in India. We
may also clarify that the finding given by us in the case of Ericsson namely
that the mere signing of the contracts in India does not give rise to any
business connection holds good in the present case also. Just because the
contracts in the case of Motorola were signed in India, it cannot be said that
there was a business connection. To reiterate the only ground for our
conclusion that there is a business connection is our finding that there was a
virtual projection of the assessee in India through the Indian company (MINL)
and that the Indian company was actually carrying out activities of a
preparatory and auxiliary character for the assessee. This ground is
accordingly dismissed.

237\. The question of attribution of income may now be considered. We have,
for reasons stated earlier, held that there; is "business connection" between
the assessee and India within the meaning of Section 9(1)(i) of the Income-tax
Act. We have also held that the assessee has a fixed place PE in India in the
form its Indian subsidiary, viz., MINL. When both the Income-tax Act and the
DTAA (with USA) apply, according to Circular No. 333 of 2.4.1982 and the
judgment of the Supreme Court in CIT v. P.V.A.L Kulandagan Chettiar (267 ITR
657), the DTAA shall prevail. In that case, there is no scope for applying
Section 9(1)(i) of the Act and consequently to consider whether any income is
required to be attributed to the "business connection" in terms of Explanation
1(a) below the section. We have to attribute income only to the PE in India.
However, we have held that there is no PE because of the deeming provisions of
Article 5.3(e) of the DTAA which says that if the PE is carrying on only
activities of a preparatory and auxiliary character, it shall not be deemed to
be a PE. In this view of the matter, there is no scope for attributing any
income to the so-called PE. We may add that we have taken a similar view in
para 212 in the case of Ericsson.

238\. To sum up our findings, we hold that:

Assessee's appeal: (ITA No. 2455/Del/2001) Ground No. 1: The notice issued
Under Section 142(1) is invalid since it is issued beyond the period of
limitation and consequently the assessment is also invalid.

Ground No. 2: The CIT (Appeals) was not right in holding that there is a PE of
the assessee in India.

Ground No. 3: The CIT (Appeals) erred in holding that the amounts received by
the assessee for the supply of software shall be assessed as "royalties". They
are not so assessable, either under the Income-tax Act or under the DTAA.

Ground No.4: There is no scope for attributing any profits, in the absence of
any PE in India. This decision is consequential tour decision in respect of
Ground No. 2.

Ground No.5: The CIT (Appeals) was wrong in holding that the sale of the GSM
equipment took place in India and income accrued to the assessee in India
Under Section 5(2).

Ground No. 6: The CIT (Appeals) was right in holding that there is a "business
connection" in India Under Section 9(1)(i) of the Act. However, no income can
be assessed on account of the business connection because the DTAA prevails
over the Act.

Ground Nos. 7-- 8: In view of our decisions in respect of the earlier grounds,
no separate decision is considered necessary..

Department's appeal (ITA No. 2516/Del/2001).

Ground No. 1: In view of our decision in the assessee's appeal that there is
no PE in India, this ground does not survive. It is dismissed.

Ground Nos. 2 & 3: These grounds relate to the levy of interest under Sections
234A and 234B. As held in para 74 (supra) the issue relating to Section 234A
is restored to the Assessing Officer with the same directions and the levy of
interest Under Section 234B is held rightly deleted by the CIT (Appeals)

239\. Both the appeals are thus partly allowed.

NOKIA (assessee's appeals 1997-98 and 1998-99) ARGUMENTS

240\. In these appeals, we are concerned with an assessee company which is
resident of Finland and, therefore, the Indo-Finland Agreement for Avoidance
of Double Taxation is applicable. There are cross appeals for both the years.
In the assessee's appeals, five issues arise for consideration. The first
issue is whether the assessee has business connection in India. The second
issue is whether there exist a PE of the assessee in India in the shape of its
liaison office and or its subsidiary company. The third issue is if there is a
PE, what is the income attributable to it for the purpose of the Income-tax
Act. The fourth issue is with regard to the taxation of the payment for the
supply of software, whether the same is to be taxed as royalty income of the
assessee. The fifth issue which is a new issue which has not arisen in the
case of Ericsson or Motorola, is the interest income arising out of what is
called "vendor financing".

241\. Before proceeding to examine these issues in detail a few point of
clarification may be recorded. In this appeal, there is no issue relating to
the validity of notice Under Section 142(1) and the consequential assessment.
The ground specifically taken in the assessee's appeal in relation to the
alleged violation of the rules of natural justice was not pressed at the time
of the hearing. With regard to the question of "business connection" though a
ground is taken in the assessee's appeals, Mr. Syali the learned counsel for
the assessee contended that he would merely restrict the case to saying that
no operations were carried on by the assessee in India. In the light of this
statement, it is not necessary for us to examine the question of business
connection in detail. In disposing of these appeals, we have taken note of the
written submissions titled "Facts in brief" which were separately filed by the
assessee. These written submissions were also explained before us in the
course of the arguments.

242\. Taking up the contract entered into between the assessee and Tata as
representative of all the contracts involved in the present case, Mr. Syali
submitted firstly that the assessee did not undertake any obligation beyond
the obligation to supply the equipment. All the other obligations which were
undertaken by the assessee were all related only to the supply of equipment
and not beyond. Both the title and the risk in the equipment passed
simultaneously in Helsinki, Finland i.e. outside India though the delivery of
the equipment was to be in India. Dealing with Clause 6.1 and Clause 6.3 of
the supply agreement, it was submitted that the income-tax authorities were
not justified in saying that these two clauses were inconsistent with each
other in the sense that the risk though professed to be transferred outside
India actually was transferred only in India as the assessee was liable to
bear the transport damage under Clause 6.3, it was submitted that though these
two clauses may seem at first blush to be inconsistent with each other, the
Clause 6.3 is actually to be construed only as a proviso or in other words
only as embodying a concession made by the assessee that it would undertake
only a small part of the entire risk related to the supply of the equipment
namely damage arising out of transport. This concession cannot be equated with
the assumption of the entire risk in relation to the delivery of the
equipment. According to Mr. Syali the undertaking of the risk in respect of
the transport damage was only a warranty of the contract and not a condition.
Dealing with Clause 18 of the contract which provided for a Project Steering
Committee (PSC) a clause on which heavy reliance had been placed by the
income-tax authorities, it was pointed out that this clause was not activated
in this year and even if it is activated, it is only for the purpose of the
supply contract and not for any other purpose. It was further pointed out that
this clause was absent in the other agreements entered into between the
assessee and the cellular operators and was a peculiar feature only in the
contract with Tata. It was pointed out that Clause 19 which was termination
clause stated that termination was possible only in respect of that part of
the contract which was yet to be performed and that the entire contract cannot
be repudiated as made out by the Department. Clause 20.5 of the agreement
which was again strongly relied upon by the Department spoke only of
relationship of vendor and vendee between the assessee and the cellular
operator and nothing more. Referring to Appendix 9 to the agreement, it was
submitted that there was only a limited responsibility on the part of the
assessee vis a vis the installation contract and the primary responsibility
therefor rested on the installer only. The power of the assessee to supervise
the installation was only incidental to the supply of equipment and it did not
mean that the assessee was fully responsible also for the installation.

243\. Referring to the contention of the Department that the contract should
be construed as a works contract, Mr. Syali drew our attention to the
provisions of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930. Section 5 of the Act stated that
the title in respect of the goods can pass independent of the delivery thereof
and both had no connection with each other. Under Section 25 of the said Act,
there can be no reservation of the "right of disposal" over the equipment.
Consistent with this provision, the assessee had not reserved any right of
disposal over the equipment, once the title and risk had passed. In this
connection he referred to a judgment of the Madras High Court in the case of
State of Madras v. Ramalingam AIR 1956 (Madras) 695 and submitted that there
was an exhaustive discussion of the subject in this case. Referring to the
letter of assignment (a copy of which is at page 343 of paper book No. 3) in
this case Mr. Syali drew our attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court in
the case of Raymond (AIR 1962 SC 1810) and to page 22 of the written
submissions filed by him. It was submitted that though the contract was
assigned to Nokia Pvt. Ltd. (NPL), the assignment letter made it clear that
NPL was to act as an independent contractor, however, subject to the condition
that the assessee would continue to be liable for the performance of NPL. Thus
the assessee continued to be liable under the supply contract as if it was
executing the same.

244\. According to Mr. Syali, the question whether there was a sale of goods
in the context of a works contract, has to be understood not in a popular
sense but only in the legal sense as held by the Supreme Court in State of
Madras v. Cannon Dunkerly & Co. (Madras) Ltd. (9 STC 353). Reference was also
made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Govt. of Andhra
Pradesh v. Guntur Tobacco AIR 1965 SC 1396 where the relevant tests were laid
down in para 18 and it was held in para 28 that the burden to show that it was
a contract of sale and not a works contract was on the revenue.

245\. Turning to the question of PE, the brief submission made by Mr. Syali
after taking us through his written submissions was that the Indian company
had been taxed in respect of the income from the installation contract thereby
recognizing the position that it is responsible only for the installation and
cannot be treated in any way as the agent of the assessee company. Therefore,
the Indian company cannot be regarded as the PE of the assessee company. He
invited our attention to page 497 to 513 of the OECD Commentary and to pages
507 and 508 of the case law paper book.

246\. As regards the question of attribution of income to the PE, there was
some overlapping of the arguments made by Mr. Syali in the sense that the
points which he made while referring to the contract with Tata are also
equally applicable to the question of attributing of income in the sense that
since the assessee was responsible only for the supervision of the supply
contract which is a limited responsibility inter woven with the fact of sale
and cannot be separated, it cannot be said that a separate PE can be created
lity of supervision and that income arose therefrom. The liaison office also
cannot be construed as a PE because it is statutorily prohibited by the
Reserve Bank of India from earning any income and our attention in this
connection was invited to page 25 onwards of the written submissions. As
regards the applicability of Rule 10 of the Income-tax Rules, it was submitted
that this Rule is subservient to Article 7.2 of the DTAA which conceived of a
functionally separate enterprise which deals with the assessee at arm's
length. In the present case there was no functionally separate enterprise in
India which dealt with the assessee at arms length and so far as the
supervision of the installation contract is concerned, the argument was that
supervision is not an economically significant activity of the PE and,
therefore, it is impossible to concede a PE merely for supervision. It was
further submitted that at any rate the cell operator had paid 63% as customs
duty which in a way indicates that the supervision element on the equipment
was embedded in the supply price itself and hence negligible. Reliance was
also made on the Indian profit and loss account prepared by the assessee (page
151 of paper book No.2) which was duly certified by the Chartered Accountants.
It was submitted that these accounts were India specific and the A.O. should
have accepted the same especially when there is a presumption that certified
accounts are true. Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in the case of CIT v. Navabharat Ferro Alloys Ltd. 244 ITR 261,
which reconciled the earlier two judgments of the same Court in the case of
CIT v. Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. 109 ITR 158, and Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels
Ltd. v. Addl. CIT 119 ITR 986. It was finally argued that at any rate even if
separate charges are assumed to have been levied for the activity of
supervision, attribution of 46% to the activity is arbitrary and too high.

Vendor Financing Scheme - Can notional interest be added?

247\. Ground No.4 in the assessee's appeal for the assessment year 1997-98
(ITA No. 1963) is directed against the addition made for notional interest on
the credit facilities extended by the assessee to the cell operators. The
agreement between the assessee and the cell operators provided for the
charging of interest of 18% on such credit facilities. However, the assessee
did not raise any invoice for the interest, nor were any entries made in the
books of account for the interest. The A.O. as well as the CIT(A) have relied
on the agreement to make the addition for notional interest. The relevant
findings of the CIT (Appeals) are contained in paragraph 9 of his order. The
audited statement is at page 152 of paper book No. II. Relying on the written
submissions made before the CIT (Appeals) (page 80 of paper book No. 1 read
with page 186 of paper book II), it was submitted before us on behalf of the
assessee that if the parties have agreed not to charge or pay interest then it
is not for the income-tax authorities to make a new contract for them and add
interest on that basis. Reliance was also placed on AS-9 relating to revenue
recognition. It was submitted that though this accounting standard has not
been notified, it has great persuasive value and no revenue should be
recognized in reality nothing has arisen. Reliance was also placed on the
judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in CIT v. Ferozepur Finance (P)
Ltd. 124 ITR 619 and that of the Calcutta High Court in CIT v. Balarampur
Commercial Enterprises Ltd. 262 ITR 439. It was thus contended that the
addition is opposed to the theory of real income.

248\. Mr G.C. Sharma, the learned senior counsel for the Income-tax
Department, prefaced his arguments with the following general propositions:

(a) The most important question to be decided is whether the assessee had a PE
in India.

(b) The question of transfer of title is not "germane" to decide the question
of the existence of PE.

(c) The real question to be decided is: "Is there a fixed place of business in
India through which the non-resident carried on business?"

(d) The provisions of the Sale of Goods Act are also irrelevant.

(e) The only relevant question is as regards the apportionment or attribution
of the income to the PE, if it is found that there is a PE.

(f) Passing of title in the GSM equipment is only a "legal event" and it is
different from the "operations of business".

(g) The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of UP and Anr. v.
UOI and Anr. 130 STC 1 is a very important decision which has to be keep in
mind while deciding the issues.

(h) According to him the decision in the case of Genon Dunkerly ( 9 STC 353 )
is no longer a good law after the insertion of Clause (29A) in Article 366 of
the Constitution.

249\. Mr. Sharma thereafter proceeded to address his arguments on the various
issues that arose for consideration. He first submitted that Nokia India Pvt.
Ltd. could not have had any expertise in installation of a GSM Cellular System
because it was incorporated only on 23.5.1995 and immediately entered into the
contract with the assessee for installation. The basic issue as to whether
this was a works contract in reality and truth but disintegrated for purposes
of income-tax has to be answered having the background of Nokia India Pvt.
Ltd. in mind. Skycell & Modi according to Mr. Sharma also fell clearly in this
category, because the assessee first contracted with both for supply of
equipment and installation thereof, but later on assigned the installation
part of the contract to Nokia India Pvt. Ltd., the Indian company. So,
according to Mr. Sharma three basic issues arose for consideration, which are:

(a) What is the business of the assessee ?

(b) Whether there is a PE in India? and

(c) The computation part of the income.

According to him, the business of the assessee was to set up a cellular
telephone system in India and worldwide. The object was to putting up a
working system and, therefore, it constituted a works contract. According to
Mr. Sharma, it could not be envisaged that a cellular operator would buy the
system without any provision for connectivity and this further strengthened
the view that it was a works contract.

250\. Taking the purchase agreement dated 17.2.1995 between the assessee and
Sky Cell, a copy of which is placed at page 1793 of paper book No. IV(d), Mr.
Sharma pointed out that the most important aspect of this contract is the
installation part which will be at the site. He pointed out that the scope of
the agreement is to "deliver, install and commission" the GSM equipment. The
installation part of the contract was subsequently assigned to the Indian
company namely Nokia India Pvt. Ltd. which is nothing but a 100% subsidiary of
the assessee. The argument of Mr. Sharma was that if initially a contract is
capable of being construed as a works contract, the subsequent assignment of a
part of the contract to another entity would be immaterial and does not alter
indivisible character of the original contract, more so when the assignment is
to a subsidiary or an affiliate company which is nothing but a subsidiary of
the assessee itself. Mr. Sharma in this connection drew our attention to the
fact that the word "affiliate" is defined in the agreement.

251\. Mr Sharma then submitted that the contracts with Modi & Skycell were
signed by Hannu Karavirta and since this person was in India, the natural
presumption is that all the contracts between the assessee and the cell
operators were signed only in India 251.1. As regards the question of
assignment of the installation part of the contract, he pointed out that the
assignment was to a subsidiary company of the assessee, which company, to
quote Mr. Sharma's words was entirely in "my hands" meaning thereby that the
subsidiary was fully under the control of the assessee. Therefore, despite the
arguments advanced on behalf of the assessee based on the theory of novation
of contract, it still remain in truth and fact the same as the original
agreement. The suggestion was that the assignment has to be ignored or that it
must be taken as if the assessee company, notwithstanding the assignment, did
not alter the character of the original contract. It is like a sub-contract
especially when it is assigned to a subsidiary or an affiliate of the Indian
company which was a 100% subsidiary of the assessee company doing no other
business. On this point Mr. Syali for the assessee intervened to clarify that
Mr. Hannu Karavirta had signed only the Indian contract with BPL. Mr. Sharma
further pointed out that Mr. Karavirta assigned the contract on 31.5.1995 and
became the employee of the assignee company namely Nokia Telecom Pvt. Ltd. on
the very next day i.e. 1.6.1995 which clearly showed that the supply of the
equipment and installation were all part of the same arrangement and cannot be
segregated.

251.2. With regard to the contracts with BPL and Modi, the same arguments were
advanced by Mr. Sharma. His broad submission was that all the contracts have
to be construed in the same manner since they were all entered into at the
same time.

252\. Referring to the "Agreement for Services" dated 19.4.1996, a copy of
which is at page 137 of paper book No. II, it was submitted by Mr. Sharma that
the Indian company namely Nokia Telecom Pvt. Ltd. could not have gained
expertise in such a short time from the date of its incorporation which is
23.5.1995 which showed that the installation work was also to be done in truth
and substance only by the assessee company.

253\. Mr. Sharma then proceeded to deal with the agreement between the
assessee and Tata, a copy of which is placed at page 828 of the paper book No.
IV-B. He submitted that a perusal of the agreement would show the following
features:

i) The object of the contract is to install and run the GSM Cellular equipment
from the view point of both the parties.

ii) The affiliate company is a company controlled by the assessee and,
therefore, it is in effect the assessee which is involved in the operations
regarding both the supply and the installation of the equipment.

iii) The site where the equipment had to be installed is very important.

iv) According to Appendix IX to the contract (Pages 1182 and 1183 of the above
paper book) the responsibilities of both the companies were to be divided
amongst them with reference to the "installation ", "coordination",
"integration" etc. and the use of these expressions unmistakably showed that
it was the assessee company which was responsible ultimately for the
installation of the equipment.

v) There is | a very important clause in the contract under the head "Nokia's
overall responsibilities" which also includes the installation. This supports
the argument in (iv) above.

vi) The clauses relating to the payment of "consideration" by inference or
natural presumption, also imply that the consideration includes consideration
for the responsibility undertaken by the assessee in connection with the
installation of the equipment.

vii) The responsibilities of Nokia, the assessee company which are listed in
the clauses appearing at pages 1187 to 1189 are connected to the installation
site and these clauses show that most of the operations necessary for
implementation of the system were to be undertaken and carried out by the
assessee company, which is denoted as "N". Similar clauses appear at page 1192
and 1193 also.

viii) The installation contract at page 1219 of the paper book is only a
bifurcation of the responsibilities relating to the installation of the
equipment which were undertaken by the assessee under the supply contract
itself.

254\. The clauses in the services contract (installation) indicate that the
purpose of this agreement is the same as is mentioned in Appendix IX in the
Supply Contract.

255\. Turning his attention to the arguments advanced with regard to the
existence of a PE of the assessee in India, Mr. Sharma pointed out that the
liaison office (LO) undertook the work of collecting all the cell operators at
the same place to sign the contracts on the same day, to collect information,
to negotiate etc. These facts indicated that the LO itself constituted a PE in
India; Referring to the contention of the assessee that the LO was not
permitted to carry out any commercial activity in India, Mr. Sharma relied
upon the order of the CIT(Apperals) and submitted that he has duly met with
this argument of the assessee. Mr. Sharma also drew our attention to paras
4.18, 4.19, 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 of the CIT(Appeals) order in support of his
arguments about the existence of a PE in India.

256\. Coming to the question of attribution of income to the PE, Mr. Sharma
referred to Article 7.3 of the DTAA between India and Finland. He submitted
that under this Article, the computation of the income attributable to the PE
shall be in accordance with the Indian law, which includes Rule 10 of the
Income-tax Rules. Rule 10 has to be read with Explanation (a)to Section
9(1)(i) of the Income-tax Act under which in the case of a business of which
all the operations are not carried out in India, the income deemed to accrue
or arise in India shall be only such part of the income as is reasonably
attributable to the operations carried out in India. He contested the argument
advanced on behalf of the assessee on the interpretation of the above
statutory provisions and submitted that these provisions do not admit of a
further adjustment of the income for "such part of the income as is reasonably
attributable to the operations carried out in India". He referred to the order
of Delhi Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Iraqi Airways v. IAC 23 ITD 115
(Paragraph 34).

257\. On the question of attribution of income to the PE, Mr. Salil Gupta, the
learned DR placed certain arguments before the Bench for consideration. He
referred to the profit and loss account at page 151 of the paper book No. II,
which is for India and submitted that the same was prepared under the cash
system of accounting which is not valid under Indian Law since a company,
under Companies Act, 1956 is obliged to prepare its accounts on the mercantile
system of accounting. He pointed out further that the CIT(Appeals) has
recorded a finding in paragraph 7 of its order that the profit and loss
account has not been substantiated and while doing so, has not endorsed the
finding of the A.O. that the loss shown by the assessee cannot be accepted in
any case. However, his finding is that the assessee was adopting the
mercantile system of accounting which according to Mr. Salil Gupta is an
erroneous finding, as is clear from the profit and loss account itself. If the
mercantile system of accounting is super imposed over the profit and loss
account prepared under the cash system of accounting, the profit and loss
account will have to be adjusted for receivables as well as payables, thus the
figures given in the profit and loss account at pages 151 & 152 of the Paper
Book No. II will have to be adjusted. The figures as given in the profit and
loss account are not reliable and, therefore the A.O. was justified in
rejecting the loss. The learned D.R. also submitted that there was no evidence
for the incurring of the research and development costs and A & G and in this
behalf relied on the order of Mumbai Bench of the Tribunal in the case of
Micoperi SPA, Milano 82 ITD 369.

258\. Mr. Syali, the learned counsel for the assessee, in his reply submitted
as follows. He pointed out that his argument that the contracts of supply and
installation are separate and independent based on the judgments of the
Supreme Court in the case of Ganon Dunkerly (supra) and Guntur Tobacco (supra)
have not been met by the Income-tax Department. According to him the judgment
of the Supreme Court in 20th Century 130 STC 1 does not over rule the earlier
judgments in Ganon Dunkerly and Guntur Tobacco (supra) and that they still
hold the field even after the 46th amendment to the Constitution of India.
Elaborating this he drew our attention to paragraphs 12 to 17 of the judgment
of the Supreme Court in the case of 20th Century (supra) and pointed out that
what was the subject matter of consideration by the Supreme Court in this case
was the expression "deemed sale" and that this concept of "deemed sale" has
not been imported or incorporated into the Income-tax Act by any amendment.
Thus he submitted that the contracts were separate and cannot be read as an
integrated whole.

259\. Turning to the arguments of the revenue with regard to the agreements
between the assessee with Tata & Skycell, Mr. Syali reiterated that the effect
of the assignment amounted to a novation of the contracts and even factually
the Indian company, which was the assignee has executed the installation and
the assessee company had nothing to do with it. He filed a chart showing the
contract, dates, signatories to the same etc. and contended that there was no
overlapping of the responsibilities of Hannu Karavirta. With regard to the
agreement with Tata (Annexure 6 & 9), Mr. Syali submitted that the worst
scenario could be that both the annexures are identical indicating the same
responsibilities but it should always be remembered that factually it was the
Indian company which discharged the responsibility for installation for which
it was remunerated and taxed and that nothing turned on the fact that the
Indian company was a 100% subsidiary of the assessee. The Indian company had
been separately assessed to tax in respect of the remuneration for
installation. Even in the assessment order, the A.O. himself had admitted
(page 3) that the installation was done only by the Indian company. He drew
our attention to pages 249 to 254 and 255 to 263 of paper book No. III where
the assessment orders of the Indian company for A.Y. 1997-98 and 1998-99
respectively have been filed.

260\. With reference to the argument of Mr. Sharma for the Department that the
Indian company did not possess any expertise in installation of the GSM
equipment, our attention was drawn by Mr. Syali to pages 353 and 364 of paper
book No. III which indicated the expertise of the Indian company. As regards
the liaison of L.O. being considered as PE of the assessee company, Mr. Syali
submitted that the L.O did not carry on any business, as required by Article
5.1 of the DTAA so that it can be considered as a PE. He pointed Out that
there is prohibition by the Reserve Bank of India on the L.O. from carrying on
any business in India. Thus the L.O. cannot be treated as PE as contended by
the Department.

261\. With regard to the question of attribution of income to the PE, Mr.
Syali submitted that Article 7.3 of the DTA does not bring in "en masse" Rule
10 of the Income-tax Rules as part thereof. The effect of this Article,
according to him, was that only those expenses that are allowed under the
Income-tax Act will be allowed as deduction while attributing the income. Rule
10 was not a provision for allowing any expenses and, therefore, this Rule was
not applicable. With regard to the order of Delhi Bench of the Tribunal in the
case of Iraqi Airways (supra) cited by the Department, Mr. Syali submitted
that in that case it was common ground between the parties that Rule 10 did
apply and, therefore, the order cannot be construed as an authority supporting
the contention of the Department that Rule 10 is applicable in all cases.

262\. With reference to the arguments of Mr. Salil Gupta, the learned D.R.,
Mr. Syali pointed out from page 152 of Paper Book No. III that full details of
the receivables were given to the Income-tax authorities and that the A.O.
could have added them and recast the profit and loss account and that without
doing so, he was not justified in rejecting the loss declared therein. He drew
our attention to the audit report where the auditors have said that cash
system of accounting was followed in order to give a "true and fair view"
(taking into account the irrecoverable) and normally this audit report should
have been accepted and acted upon. As regards the allow-ability of A&G and R&D
expenses and other similar expenses incurred outside India, Mr. Syali
submitted that there was no prohibition on allowing them as deductions.
According to Mr. Syali the claim was also justified because it was germane to
the manufacturing activity of the assessee company. He sought to distinguish
the order of the Mumbai Bench in the case of Micoperi (supra) on the ground
that in that case the assessee did not furnish the requisite details despite
being asked. In the present case no details were asked for and, therefore, the
said decision is not applicable.

263\. We now take up the Department's appeals for the assessment years 1997-98
and 1998-99. The arguments of the revenue were the same as in the other cases
of Motorola and Ericsson. The Department's appeals are with regard to the
assessment of royalty of software licensing, attribution of income to the PE
and the validity of the levy of interest under sections 234A and 234B. In
respect of all these three issues Mr. Sharma stated that his arguments are the
same as in the other cases.

264\. In the Department's appeals, the argument of Mr. Syali for the assessee
were also the same in respect of the validity of levy of interest. He was
directed by the Bench to file a copy of the form No.ITNS-150. With regard to
the attribution of income to the PE he submitted that the AO has ignored this
aspect all together. As regards the assessment of the consideration for
software licensing as royalty, he adopted the same arguments as in the other
two cases on this question but briefly added that; (a) the software was
specifically connected to the hardware and integrated into the same and was
thus a copyrighted article, (b) if it is held that there is a PE in India,
then the consideration for the software licensing will be part of business
profits of the assessee company under Article 7 of the DTAA and not royalty;
and (c) the Australian Court's decision placed at pages 176 to 184 of paper
book No. II, especially the observations at pages 179 to 182 clearly supported
the assessee's case on this question.

265\. As regards interest under sections 234A and 234B, Mr. Syali stated that
his arguments ere the same as in the other cases.

NOKIA ( A.Y.1997-98 & 1998-99.) DECISION

266\. There are four appeals in this case, two by the assessee and two by the
Department. In fact they are all cross appeals. The grounds taken by the
assessee as well as the Department are identical and even where there are
minor differences, especially in ground No.1 taken by the assessee in its
appeals for both the years, they are not of any consequence.

Assessee's appeals.

267\. In the assessee's appeals, the following issues arise for consideration:

i) Is there a business connection in India? ii) Is there a permanent
establishment of the assessee in India in the form of its liaison office or in
the form of its 100% subsidiary Nokia India Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter known as
NPL)?

iii) Is there a sale of hardware by the assessee in India? If so, how much
profit can be attributed to such sale for income-tax purposes?

iv) What is the treatment to be accorded for the payments for the supply of
software, which the income-tax authorities have assessed as royalty?

v) Are the income-tax authorities right in assessing the interest income on
account of vendor financing and delayed payments from the Indian Telecom
Operators?

268\. We may straightaway clarify that in these appeals, the issue of the
validity of the notice Under Section 142(1) and consequent validity of the
assessment made on the assessee are not in issue though the CIT (Appeals) has
decided this issue against the assessee. We are, therefore, not to decide this
issue. At the time of hearing the learned counsel for the assessee stated that
the assessee does not wish to press ground No. 5 for both the years which is
that the orders passed by the departmental authorities are violative of the
rules of natural justice.

269\. So far as the first issue is concerned, namely, the existence of
business connection, the learned counsel for the assessee submitted that he
would restrict his case to contending that no operations were carried on by
the assessee in India and, therefore, no income was taxable in India Under
Section 9(1)(i) of the Income-tax Act.

270\. Before taking up the issues for consideration, we may briefly notice the
facts of the assessee's case. The assessee, namely, Nokia Networks OY is a
company incorporated in Finland and a tax resident thereof. It opened a
liaison office (hereinafter referred to as 'LO') in India on 30.3.1994. Two
agreements were signed between the assessee on the one hand and the Indian
Cellular Operators on the other hand namely Modi Telestra (I) Ltd. and Skycell
Communication Ltd. on 23.3.1995 and 17.2.1995 respectively. When these
contracts were signed, the assessee's subsidiary i.e. NPL was not in
existence. It was incorporated only later on 23.5.1995. Thereafter, four other
agreements were entered into with different cellular operators namely Tata,
Evergrowth Fascell, BPL and Supreme. The assessee supplied both the hardware
and software to the Indian cellular operators and NPL, its 100% subsidiary,
carried out installation work.

271\. The main question to be considered is about the role of the LO. The
subsidiary questions which arise are:

(a) Whether the LO can be said to furnish "business connection" to the
assessee India, and

(b) Whether the LO can be said to constitute a PE of the assessee in India.

Taking up the first question, we are of the view that the LO has not carried
out any business activity for the assessee in India and that its role has been
only to assist the assessee in the preliminary and preparatory work. By the
rules of the Reserve Bank of India, a LO is not permitted to carry on any
business activity for a foreign enterprise. Its activities are closely
monitored by the Reserve Bank of India. Reserve Bank of India has not found
any violation of the rules under which permission has been granted to the LO.
The LO no doubt has certain staff who have been paid salary and perquisites
but there is no evidence to show that they were transacting any business in
India on behalf of the assessee. The LO has only carried out advertising
activity which cannot by any means furnish business connection. The Income-tax
authorities would appear to have also held that the LO carried out marketing
activities for the assessee in India but for this finding, there is no
evidence and hone of the contracts which have been brought on record indicate
that the LO has carried out any marketing activities. In paragraph 5.2 of his
order, the CIT (Appeals) has stated that the facts and circumstances suggest
that the assessee carried out business in India through its LO which was not
merely preparatory or incidental in nature and that even the designing of the
GSM, which was the heart of the activity, was done by the LO. Though he has
not stated as much in terms what he perhaps had in mind is that the LO had
something to do with the designing activity connected to the GSM. He has made
a very general statement that the assessee always had the presence of its
office, meaning thereby the LO to aid it in its activities. He has not,
however, referred to any material or evidence on the basis of which he has
come to this conclusion. He is also not justified in rejecting the assessee's
argument based on the order of the Special Bench of the Tribunal in the case
of Mitsui & Co. Ltd. 39 ITD 59 to the effect that a LO, which by law is
prohibited from engaging itself in any business activities in India on behalf
of the foreign enterprise, can be considered to furnish a business connection
in India. We are, therefore, satisfied that there is no material or evidence
on the basis of which it could be said that the LO can afford a business
connection to the assessee in India.

272\. The next question to be considered is whether the same activities which
have been carried on also by the Indian subsidiary namely NPL can constitute
business connection within the meaning of Section 9(1)(i). In our opinion,
they do constitute a business connection by virtue of it being a 100%
subsidiary of the assessee company and by engaging itself in activities to
support the assessee's main activity. There is a service agreement between NPL
and the cellular operator and there is also a technical support agreement
between NPL and the cellular operator. These agreements generally support the
assessee's activity of supplying GSM hardware equipment in India and,
therefore, it cannot be said that these agreements do not furnish business
connection. There are also marketing agreements between the assessee and NPL
dated 19.4.1996 and 6.11.1997, which admittedly operate during the years under
consideration. These agreements also afford the; business connection in India.
We are, therefore, satisfied that a business connection within the meaning of
Section 9(1)(i) of the Act is established through the Indian subsidiary in
India.

273\. There is also one more strong reason for holding that there is a
business connection in India. This is that all the contracts between the
assessee on the one hand and the Indian cellular operators on the other hand,
were signed in India. Three such contracts with Modi, BPL and Skycell were
signed by one Hannu Karavirta. Mr. Hannu Karavirta was the Country Manager of
the Liaison Office in India since the inception of the Liaison Office from
1.2.1994. He signed the supply contract with Skycell on 17.2.1995. He also
signed the supply contract with Modi Telstra on 23.3.1995. These were all
signed before 23.5.1995, the date on which Nokia Telecom P. Ltd. ("NTPL"), the
100% subsidiary of the assessee company, was incorporated. On 31.5.1995,
Karavirta signed the installation part of the contract with Skycell. However
on the very same day he assigned these contracts to NTPL and thereafter on the
very next day (i.e. 1.6.1995) became an employee of NTPL. On 1.1.1996 he
became the Managing Director of NTPL and thereafter signed the installation
contract with the cellular operators on behalf of NTPL. The argument of Mr.
G.C. Sharma based on these facts was that the contracts were assigned only to
the assessee's 100% subsidiary which was actually under the control of the
assessee and though legally speaking the assignment of the contract may amount
to a novation, in substance and truth it remains the same in its original
form, especially when the person who signed the contract on behalf of the
assessee company became the implementer of the installation contracts in his
capacity as the employee of NTPL from the very next day. It is significant to
note that before 1.6.1995 Hannu Karavirta was representing the assessee
company and had also signed the supply contract on its behalf and on or from
1.6.1995 he became the employee of NTPL, the 100% subsidiary of the assessee
company and began signing and implementing the installation contracts. It is
also significant to note that in respect of Skycell and Modi the assessee
contracted with them both for supply and installation of the GSM equipment,
but after the incorporation of NTPL, the installation part of the contract was
assigned to it. It is also noteworthy that NTPL was incorporated only on
23.5.1995 and could have had no expertise in installation so that it can take
up the installation work. All these, facts show a close connection between the
assessee and NTPL and since a common person namely Hannu Karavirta was
involved with both the companies, the distinction between them got blurred and
though they were separate corporate entities, for all practical purposes, one
got identified with the other. The NTPL thus affords a live connection
amounting to business connection. For the very same reasons, NTPL also
constitutes a permanent establishment of the assessee in India because the
assessee virtually projects itself in India, through NTPL and Karavirta who
acted for both.

274\. (a) Taking up the first part of the second question as to whether the
L.O. can constitute a PE of the assessee in India, we are of the view that it
cannot. Whatever we have stated as our reasons for holding that the L.O.
cannot be said to furnish business connection with India, equally applies to
the question whether L.O. can constitute the PE of the assessee in India. We,
therefore, do not consider it necessary to elaborate this point further except
to note that the L.O. does not fit into any of the various categories of PE
mentioned in Article 5.2 of the DTAA between India and Finland. We, therefore,
hold that the L.O. cannot constitute the PE of the assessee in India.

(b) Taking up the second part of the second question as to whether the Indian
subsidiary of the assessee, referred to as NTPL, can be considered as a PE of
the assessee in India, we are of the view that having regard of the findings
recorded by both the A.O. and the CIT (Appeals), the NTPL can be considered as
a PE. The issue has been dealt with in paragraph 6.3 of the order of the CIT
(Appeals), though in several earlier parts of the order, there is scattered
reference to this aspect of the matter. However, the final decision of the CIT
(Appeals) is only in paragraph 6.3 of his order. A reading of this paragraph
shows clearly that what the CIT (Appeals) has in mind, as in the case of the
A.O, is that NTPL, the Indian subsidiary, is the virtual projection of the
assessee itself in India, though this idea may not have been properly
articulated in the orders of the Income-tax authorities. The main point
brought out by them is that in respect of the services rendered by NTPL to the
assessee under the "marketing agreement", it was compensated on the basis of
cost plus 5% which means that in addition to getting the expenses reimbursed,
NTPL will get 5% more. It stands to reason that in respect of the marketing
activity, NTPL has no scope for incurring any loss. Nevertheless, its accounts
show a book loss of Rs 10 crores (approximately) and even if the depreciation
loss of Rs 2 crores is ignored still the loss is around Rs 8 crores. The
question posed by the Income-tax authorities is: Where from this loss has
arisen ? The answer is that such a loss has arisen only from the installation
activity carried out by the NTPL. In other words the installation charges
received by NTPL from the cellular operators in India were not commensurate
with the costs and expenses incurred therefor and that is the reason why such
a loss has been incurred. Now the other question is how does this result in
NTPL being regarded as the PE of the assessee company. The answer is that
since NTPL is a wholly owned subsidiary of the assessee in India and is
consequently in a position to control and monitor its activities, the
installation charges were directed to be so fixed that they were not
commensurate with the services rendered by NTPL. The next question will be why
would the assessee do so. We cannot think of any other reason except that the
part of the price for installation of the GSM equipment was diverted as the
price for the supply contract. Whether there is direct evidence or not for
this conclusion, or whether it is permissible for us even to make such an
inference from the circumstances of the case, is not really material for the
present purpose. What is material is that there was ample scope for the
assessee to control and monitor the activities of NTPL which, it should be
remembered, is a 100% subsidiary of the assessee, in such a manner that NTPL
became a virtual projection of the assessee company in India. The other point
made by the Income-tax authorities was that the assessee even represented to
the Indian cellular operators that it will not dilute its share holding in the
Indian subsidiary below 51% without the written permission of the Indian
cellular operators. This allegation of the Income-tax authorities has not been
refuted or proved wrong by the assessee in the course of the proceedings
before them or even before us. This also shows that the distinction between
the two corporate entities, namely, the assessee on one hand and NTPL, its
100% subsidiary on the other hand, virtually got blurred with the result that
it can be said that when the Indian cellular operators were dealing with NTPL
in connection with the installation contract and marketing agreement, they
were in fact dealing with the assessee itself. We are therefore, of the
opinion that the test propounded by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case
of CIT v. Visakhapatnam Port Trust 144 ITR 146 is fully answered. We are,
therefore, unable to find fault the CIT (Appeals) for holding that NTPL, the
100% Indian subsidiary of the assessee, constituted the assessee's PE in
India.

(c) At this juncture it may be pointed out that in the case of Motorola, we
have held that the Indian subsidiary of Motorola cannot be considered as a PE
but that was because of Article 5.3(e) of the DTAA with USA which provided
that the term "Permanent Establishment" shall be deemed not to include the
maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of activities
which have a preparatory or auxiliary character for the foreign enterprise. In
the present case (Nokia), however the activities of the Indian subsidiary of
Nokia, i.e. NTPL, are not of a preparatory or auxiliary character. Therefore,
Article 5.4(e) of the DTAA between India and Finland, which is similar to
Article 5.3(e) of the DTAA with USA, does not apply and we cannot hold that
the NTPL cannot be deemed to be the PE of the assessee. The activities of NTPL
are something more than preparatory or auxiliary in nature. They do not also
fall under any of the other Clauses (a) to (d) of Article 5.4 of the DTAA with
Finland. We felt the need to explain this aspect of the matter in order to
dispel any notion that there may be a contradiction in our conclusions
regarding PE between the case of Motorola and the case of Nokia.

275\. The third question is whether there is a sale of hardware by the
assessee in India and if so how much profit can be attributed to this activity
for purposes of Income-tax. The Income-tax authorities have taken the view
that the title in the goods passed in India and, therefore, the sale of the
hardware took place in India. We may take up first the contract between the
assessee and Tata Communications Ltd., hereinafter referred to as "Tata" for
the supply of equipment for the GSM Network. This agreement is dated
15.6.1996. Clause 3 defines the scope of supply of equipment. Under Clause
3.1, the assessee is to supply "all of the equipment, spare parts and the
special tools and instruments specified in the respective confirmed orders".
This shows that the agreement is for supply of equipment and spares etc.
relating to the equipment. Clause 5, which speaks of parts and payments, shows
that the price payable is only equipment related and nothing else. Clause 6 is
important and it speaks of delivery, title and risk. According to Clause 6.1,
the title to the hardware "shall pass to the purchaser at the port of shipment
in Helsinki, Finland or any other originating port of shipment as the case may
be". This clause speaks of the passing pf the risk also. It says that "risk of
loss as regards the hardware shall pass to the purchaser simultaneously with
the title at the port of shipment in Helsinki, Finland or any other
originating port of shipment, as the case may be" (underline ours). Thus both
the title and the risk in the hardware passed outside India and
simultaneously. Clause 6.3 says that the purchaser shall inspect the delivery
within 7 calendar days of their arrival in Hyderabad, India and if any
transport damage is discovered, the assessee shall effect replacement as soon
as reasonably possible. These two clauses read together imply that a small
part of the risk, namely, the transport damage, alone is to be borne by the
assessee. That does not mean that the assessee is to bear the entire risk.
Clause 6.3 is only a warranty given by the assessee and not a condition.
Clause 8.1 under the head "warranties and spare parts" says that the assessee
shall warrant that the hardware will be new and unused except for the testing
required under the contract when delivered. The assessee is also bound to
promptly remedy all defects found in the hardware within the warranty period.
This clause is not inconsistent with Clause 6.1, which says that both the
title and the risk passed outside India. The mere fact that the assessee
warranties that the hardware supplied by it will be new and unused and
undertakes to remedy all defects pointed out during the warranty period does
not mean that the risk continues to be with the assessee even after the
hardware is delivered to the cellular operators in India. Clause 8.1 is only
in the nature of a warranty. This shall be clear from Clause 8.3 which says
that if any defect is discovered in the hardware during the warranty period
then "the purchaser shall arrange, at its own cost, the returned shipment of
the defective part, sub-assembly or unit (if applicable) to facilitate in New
Delhi therefor designated by the supplier......". This provision can only be
consistent with the position that the property and the risk in the goods have
passed outside India as otherwise Tata, the purchaser, cannot be compelled to
bear the expenses of returning the defective part.

276\. We may now refer to Clause 18 of the agreement under the head "Project
Steering Committee". This clause provides for the creation of a Project
Steering Committee (PSC) for monitoring the progress of performance of the
respective duties and obligations under the supply contract, of the parties.
It has been clarified before us on behalf of the assessee that this clause was
not activated during the year and that a similar clause is absent in the other
contracts. It was submitted and in our opinion rightly that this clause which
provides for a joint creation of the PSC does not in any manner militate
against the contention that the risk and title in the hardware have passed
outside India. The duty of the PSC is only to ensure that both the parties to
the contract carry out their respective obligations properly.

277\. Clause 19 speaks of termination of the supply contract for default.
Clause 19.1 clarifies that termination is possible only to such part of the
supply contract as remains unperformed, unless it would be manifestly
unreasonable to require the terminating party to retain the part performed by
the defaulting party. The inability of Tata which is the purchaser, to
terminate what has already been fulfilled by the assessee under the contract,
is indicative of the fact that the risk and title in the hardware has passed
outside India. In other words the hardware has become the property of Tata
outside India and thereafter Tatas continue to hold the hardware at their own
risk and, therefore, no part of the contract prior to the passing of the title
and risk could be lawfully terminated by it.

278\. The refrain of Mr. G.C. Sharma, the learned Senior counsel for the
Department was based on Appendix 9 to the supply contract with Tatas which
speaks of Nokia's overall responsibilities. We have gone through Appendix 9
which is at pages 1182 and 1183 of the contract between the assessee and Tata
compiled in a Box file Vol. IV. He referred to page 1183 and submitted that it
was clearly provided therein that Nokia will be responsible for the delivery
and installation, testing and commissioning of goods as defined in the
contract. It was his submission that because Nokia, the assessee, has
undertaken the overall responsibility for the installation of the GSM
equipment also, the title and risk continue to remain with the assessee and
did not pass till the equipment was installed and passed the acceptance test.
This argument was also taken in support of the contention that the supply
contract and the installation together formed a works contract. Neither of
these contentions can be accepted. As regards the contention that the
contracts constitute a works contract, we have elaborately dealt with the same
while disposing of the appeals in the case of Ericsson and, therefore, there
is no need to repeat them here. So far as the argument that the risk and title
passed to Tata only after the acceptance test has been satisfactorily carried
out is concerned, we are unable to accept the same merely on the basis of the
statement made in Appendix 9 to the contract under the heading "Nokia's
overall responsibilities". A careful reading of page 1183 shows that Nokia,
the assessee, is bound to provide the installation tools and test equipment
for the testing teams as agreed in the contract and would also be responsible
for the documentation for installation of sites as agreed upon and for the
installation supervision. This is obviously because Nokia, having supplied the
GSM equipment, would be in a better position and in fact would be more
interested in ensuring that the equipment is properly installed. The primary
responsibility for installation is that of the installer, which is a separate
company independent of the assessee and also assessed separately in respect of
the installation income. By merely providing installation tools and testing
equipment or the documentation for installation or supervising the
installation, it cannot be said that the assessee was primarily responsible
for the installation of the equipment and the title and risk in the GSM
hardware continued with it till the acceptance test was carried out. We hasten
to clarify that our observations in paragraph 274(b) to the effect that the
distinction between the assessee and NTPL, its subsidiary, got blurred be
understood in the context of our decision with regard to the existence of a PE
in India. We only meant to convey that because of the close connection between
the assessee and NTPL, it was possible to look upon NTPL as a "virtual
projection" of the assessee in India. We have in fact clarified in the same
paragraph that what matters is that there was scope for previewing the
assessee's soul in the body of NTPL and that it did not matter that there was
no direct evidence for the control of NTPL by the assessee. For purposes of
PE, what is relevant is only the perception that NTPL was a projection of the
assessee, whether or not in fact and truth its activities were being
controlled / monitored by the assessee. Our observations are therefore,
confined to the question of PE. Otherwise, both the assessee and NTPL remain
separate corporate entities and NTPL has also been assessed separately for its
installation income. Thus the observations in para 274(b) have no relevance to
what has been discussed in this paragraph.

279\. We may now briefly notice the significance of the "acceptance test".
This is referred to in the installation contract dated 15th June, 1996 entered
into between Tata Communications Ltd. (Tata) and NTPL. Clause 8 of the
installation contract speaks of "inspection, testing and acceptance". Briefly
speaking it says that the equipment after installation shall be tested by NTPL
which is the installation company. The various clauses describe in detail the
procedure for testing, notice to be given, aspects to be seen etc. which are
not very relevant for our purpose. Clause 8.4 which is relevant for our
purpose says that "in the event that the equipment and / or ancillary
equipment at the site concerned does not satisfactorily pass the tests, Nokia
shall rectify the defects and the procedure referred to above in this Article
shall be repeated as many times as is necessary, in order for testing and
acceptance to be satisfactorily completed". We may clarify that Nokia,
referred to in this clause, is the installer which is NTPL and not the
assessee company. The significance of this clause is that it is the installer
i.e. NTPL which shall continue to remain responsible for removing the defects
in the equipment till the acceptance test is satisfactorily conducted. This
clearly excludes the assessee company from any kind of responsibility for
malfunctioning or non-functioning of the GSM equipment or for not
satisfactorily passing the acceptance test. The conclusion drawn to the
contrary by the Income-tax authorities is untenable.

280\. We have perused the assessment order for the assessment years 1997-98
and 1998-99. The A.O. has referred only to the supply contract entered into by
the assessee with Tata and BPL. No other contract has been adverted to in any
detail. We have found that there is no material difference between the terms
of the two contracts and that is why we have also referred only to the supply
contract with Tata in some detail. In fact even the learned counsel for the
assessee has referred only to the supply contract with Tata in some detail.
Neither of the parties before us has referred to any other supply contract in
the course of the arguments.

281\. The fourth question is regarding the treatment to be accorded to the
payments made to the assessee for supply of software. The A.O. has assessed
the payments as royalties but the CIT (A) has assessed it as business profits
on the ground that the assessee has a PE in India in the form of both "LO" and
NTPL. On this point, the parties are agreed that the nature of payments made
by the cellular operators for use of software supplied by the assessee
alongwith the hardware is the same as in the cases of Ericsson and Motorola.
Only one aspect needs to be noticed in this case and that is that in para 8.1
of his order, the CIT (Appeals) has decided that the amount paid for use of
the software is to be treated as the commercial income or business profits of
the assessee since the assessee has been held by him to have a PE in India.
However, the nature of the payment has been found by us in the cases of
Ericsson and Motorola to be not royalty at all. We have found that the payment
is for a copyrighted article and not the copyright right. The same finding
holds good in this case also. Therefore, even Article 13.6 of the DTAA which
provides that if the foreign enterprise has a PE in India, the royalties shall
be taxed not under Article 13 but as business profits under Article 7 of the
DTAA, will not be attracted. In other words even though we have held that the
100% Indian subsidiary of the assessee, namely, NTPL, constitutes the
assessee's PE in India, the payment for the software cannot be assessed under
Article 13 for the reason that it is not in the nature of royalty. However, a
question may arise as to why the payment cannot be assessed as "business
profits" under Article 7. The reason is that the software has been held by us
to be part of the GSM Cellular Systems as a whole, the sale of which has taken
place outside India as held by us earlier.

282\. The 5th question is whether the addition of Rs 5 crores for each of the
assessment years 1997-98 and 1998-99 as interest on vendor financing is
justified. This issue is discussed in paragraph 9 of the order of the CIT (A)
for the assessment year 1997-98. The brief facts are that the assessee
provided credit facilities to the Indian Cell Operators on which interest @
18% was chargeable as per the agreement. It appears that the facts in this
connection were not brought out clearly before the A.O. despite being called
upon and, therefore, the A.O., finding that the assessee had not declared any
interest in the return, was forced to estimate the interest at Rs 5 crores for
each of the two assessment years. Before the CIT (Appeals), the assessee
contended that though there was provision in the agreement to charge interest
from the cell operators, it was never activated or acted upon by the parties,
that no entries were passed in the assessee's books of account for the
interest, that no invoices for interest were raised against the cell operators
and that in these circumstances, the interest cannot be said to have accrued
at all and that the A.O. was not justified in estimating and adding the
notional interest. Written submissions were also filed before the CIT
(Appeals) articulating the above points (page 80 of PB No. I read with page
186 of PB No. II). The audited statements placed at page 152 of paper book No.
II were also relied upon. The CIT (Appeals), however, rejected the assessee's
submissions and recorded the following findings:

(a) The assessee maintained accounts on the mercantile basis as it was
required to under the Companies Act, 1956 under which it was required to do so
in respect of its Indian operations.

(b) No evidence was filed by the assessee to show that the financial position
of the cell operators was so bad that they could not pay the principal amount
or the interest.

(c) There was a defect in the books of account at least to the extent that
interest chargeable was not taken credit for.

On the above findings, the CIT (Appeals) applied the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of State Bank of Travancore 158 ITR 102 and held that the
interest was rightly added in the assessments.

283\. We have considered the facts and the rival contentions but we find no
substance in the assessee's case. The findings of the CIT (Appeals) have not
been refuted before us on the basis of any material or evidence. The existence
of the clause in the agreement for charging interest @ 18% p.a. is not denied.
All that is contended is that the clause was not activated but this contention
is without substance because if the agreement is in force then it is in force
with all its clauses which includes the charging of interest. It was for the
assessee to show on the basis of any evidence or correspondence or subsequent
agreement modifying the earlier agreement under which interest was chargeable.
This has not been done. The mere fact that no credit was taken in the account
books for the interest cannot stop the accrual thereof as the assessee's
income, Even before us no evidence was filed to show that the financial
position of the cell operators was bad and that there was an agreement between
the parties not to charge interest or not to activate the clause providing for
interest. In these circumstances, we uphold the addition for both the years.

284\. The only question which remains is that of attribution of the income.
There are two aspects of the matter. Under Section 9(1)(i) of the Income-tax
Act, all income accruing or arising, whether directly or indirectly, through
or from any business connection in India shall be deemed to accrue or arise in
India. Explanation 1 clarifies that in the case of a business of which all the
operations are not carried out in India, the income of the business deemed
under this clause to accrue or arise in India shall be only such part of the
income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India.
If we turn to Article 7 of the DTAA between India and Finland, we find that
Article 7.1 says that the profits of an enterprise of a contracting state
shall be taxable only in that state, unless the enterprise carries on business
in the other contracting state through a PE situated therein. If the
enterprise carries on business in the other state through a PE, the profits of
the enterprise may be taxed by the State in which the PE is situated, but only
so much of the profits as are attributable to the PE. Article 7.2 says that
the profits attributable to the PE are those which the PE is expected to make
as if it were a distinct and separate enterprise engaged in the same or
similar activities under the same or similar conditions and dealing wholly
independently with the enterprise of which it is a PE. Article 7.3 says that
in determining the profits of a PE all expenses incurred for the purposes of
the PE, including executive and general administrative expenses are to be
allowed as are allowed under the provisions of the domestic law of the
contracting state in which the PE is situated. The other sub articles are not
relevant for our purpose. We have held that the assessee has a business
connection in India and, therefore, Article 9(1)(i) is attracted. We have also
held that the assessee has a PE in India in the form of NTPL. The question of
attribution of income can, therefore, arise under both the situations namely
where there is a business connection and where the assessee has a PE in India.
It is, however, a well settled position that the provisions of the DTAA
override the provisions of the Income-tax Act and if any authority is needed
reference may be made to CBDT Circular No. 333 dated 2.4.1982 and the judgment
of the Supreme Court referred to in para 263. Therefore, in this case we have
to attribute the income to the PE and it is not necessary for us to apply
Section 9(1)(i) of the Income-tax Act.

285\. We have considered the matter of attribution of income to the PE
carefully. For the assessment year 1997-98 the Assessing Officer has first
bifurcated the value of the total supply of equipment i.e. both hardware and
software into 70% for hardware and 30% for software. 70% of the supply value
comes to Rs 102,63,12,952/-. He has estimated the income at 40% thereof which
comes to Rs 41,05,25,180. From this figure he has deducted 5% as permissible
expenses Under Section 44C of the Income-tax Act which comes to Rs
2,05,26,259. The balance of Rs 38,99,98,92.1 has been taken as the taxable
income from hardware and is taxed @ 55%. A similar procedure has been adopted
in the assessment year 1998-99, except that tax has been charged @ 48%. The
CIT (Appeals) in paragraph 7 of his order for the assessment year 1997-98 has
reduced the income to 5% of the sales to Indian parties. While doing so he has
noted that the profit and loss account relating to Indian operations of the
assessee is not substantiated with any documents and is, therefore, not
reliable for the purpose of computing the income from sale of hardware. He has
accordingly taken the assistance of Rule 10 of the Income-tax Rules to compute
the profits on the basis of the assessee's global accounts. He has noted that
the global accounts showed a net profit of 10.8%. The net profit on Indian
sales was, therefore, taken at 10.8% but the CIT (Appeals) held that since the
whole of this profit cannot be attributed to the Indian operations as the
activities relating to manufacture and development of the products were
undertaken outside India, he has ultimately held that the profits attributable
to operations in India should be taken at 5% of the sales to the Indian
parties. For the assessment year 1998-99, he has taken 7.9% of the sale value
considering the fact the net profit on Indian sales was 16.1% as against 10.8%
in the preceding year.

286\. The Department in its appeals has taken the ground that the CIT
(Appeals) was not justified in reducing the income from 40% of the value of
the hardware to 5% of the sales to Indian parties. Actually, for the
assessment year 1998-99, the ground should be that the CIT (Appeals) was not
justified in reducing the income to 7.9%. It appears to be a mistake in
drafting the ground No. 1. On the other hand the assessee in its appeals has
taken up several contentions including the contention that no income can be
attributed to the PE at all primarily because whatever expenses that are
incurred by it are compensated by the assessee on cost plus basis, that if the
expenditure incurred by the PE is taken into account then there will be no
income left to be assessed, that there are several activities which do not
lead to the existence of the PE and, therefore, they cannot contribute to the
revenues of the PE, that no income can be attributed to the supervision
because the supervision is only an incident of the sale and does not
constitute an operation by itself, that the India specific accounts were
wrongly rejected by the CIT (Appeals) and that at any rate the adoption of 5%
and 7.9% of the sales to Indian parties is arbitrary and excessive.

287\. We have carefully considered the arguments raised by the Department as
well as the assessee. In the present case it cannot be disputed that the
research and development activities and the manufacture of the GSM equipment
took place wholly outside India. We have also found, for reasons stated
earlier, that the title and risk in the equipment also passed wholly outside
India. The only activities which the assessee carried on in India through its
PE were:

a) Net work planning,

b) Negotiations in connection with the sale of equipment, and

c) The signing of the supply and installation contracts.

In the case of Ahmadbhai Umarbhar (18 ITR 472), the Supreme Court held that
the income attributable to the manufacturing activity should be more than the
income attributable to the activity of sale. In the case of Annamalai Timber
Trust & Co. v. CIT (41 ITR 781), the Madras High Court approved the Tribunal's
decision that 10% of the income can be attributed to the signing of the
contracts in India. The Calcutta High Court also approved the same percentage
as income attributable to the signing of the contracts in India in the case of
CIT v. Bertram Scott Ltd.(31 Taxman 444). We have kept the principles laid
down in these judgments in mind. In the present case, as already noted, in
addition to the signing of the contracts in India, the preliminary
negotiations for the contracts and the network planning were carried out
through the PE. We may clarify here that the network planning: activity is
different from the activities which are of a preparatory or auxiliary
character. In respect of signing of contracts, alone, the income attributed is
10%, in the decisions cited above. Two more activities have been carried out
by the PE in India and, therefore, we have to attribute a higher income than
what was attributed in the decided cases. The negotiations which ultimately
lead to the signing of the contracts may involve more effort on the part of
the PE and the signing of the contracts is only the fructification of those
efforts. Obviously, therefore, the income attributable to the negotiations
part should be more and in addition to the income attributable to the signing
of the contracts. Some income has to be attributed to the net work planning
also. Taking all these into consideration, we consider it fair and reasonable
to attribute 20% of the net profit in respect of the Indian sales as the
income attributable to the PE. The following steps are involved in computing
the income attributable to the PE:

First the global sales and the global net profit have to be ascertained. From
the accounts presented before us as well as before the Income-tax authorities,
the global net profit rate has been ascertained at 10.8% and 16.1% by the CIT
(Appeals), to which no objection has been taken by either side. This
percentage has to be applied to the Indian sales and by Indian sales, we mean
the total contract price for the equipment as a whole and not the bifurcated
price which the Assessing Officer has referred to in the assessment order.
This will also be consistent with our view that the software and the hardware
constitute one integrated equipment. The resultant figure would be the net
profit arising in respect of the Indian sales: Out of this figure of net
profit 20% shall be attributed to the PE to cover the three activities
mentioned above. The A.O. is directed to compute the income of the PE as
directed above.

288\. Only one point remains to be noted. In the initial stages of the
arguments in the case of Ericsson, Mr. Sharma, the learned senior counsel for
the Department, pointed out that the assessee has adopted the Mutual Agreement
Procedure and filed an application before the Competent Authority by an
application dated 11th March,2003, and contended that this shows that it was
taxable in India. This was opposed by Mr. Dastur, the learned counsel for
Ericsson. He contended that no argument based on the MAP application would be
decisive. He drew our attention to paragraph 9 of the MAP application (filed
in the form of a separate paper book) and pointed out that the assessee's
prayer therein that income relatable to the supply of the GSM cellular system
may be taxable in India as "business profits" under Article 7 of the DTAA
(with Sweden) was subject to the existence of a PE in India, which was denied
by the assessee in the same paragraph. He accordingly contended that no useful
purpose would be served by harping on the MAP application. We have gone
through the said paragraph of the application under the MAP. Therein, the
assessee (Ericsson) has requested the Government of Sweden to represent to the
Government of India that income from the supply of the mobile
telecommunication systems (including hardware and software) supplied to the
Indian Cellular Operators is not taxable in India since Ericsson does not have
a PE in India. It has also been stated therein that the payment for the
software does not constitute "royalty" as per the provisions of the DTAA. The
assessee has finally requested the Government of Sweden to represent to the
Government of India to reach an agreement "to the extent that any income
generated by the Applicant from the supply of the Mobile Telecommunication
Systems (i.e. Hardware and Software) to the ICO is Business Profit under
Article 7, taxable subject to existence of PE in India, which is not the case
here". It is thus clear that there is no admission on the part of the assessee
that the income is taxable in India, as claimed on behalf of the Department.
The existence of the PE in India is denied. Under Article 7, business profits
can be taxed in India only if there is a PE in India. The taxability of the
payment for the software is also denied under the terms of the DTAA. Thus, in
our opinion, there is no admission in the MAP which would render the appellate
proceedings before us academic. Therefore, we hold that the fact that the
assessee (Ericsson) has adopted the MAP procedure does not come in the way of
the Tribunal disposing of the appeal. It needs to be stated that our view is
based on the fact that the assessee (Ericsson) has hot admitted in MAP that it
is taxable in India and its stand before us in the appeal is in conformity
with its stand under the MAP. We, however, clarify that we have not examined
the question as to what would happen in a case where the assessee admits its
taxability under the MAP but wishes to take a completely contradictory stand
in the appeal before the Tribunal. The question whether in such a case an
assessee can be permitted to pursue its appeal before the Tribunal is a moot
question which we leave open, to be decided in an appropriate case. We may add
that in the case of Ericsson, after Mr. Dastur pointed out the stand taken by
the assessee in its application under the MAP, the matter was fairly not
pursued by Mr. Sharma, the learned senior counsel for the Revenue.

289\. The assessee's grounds of appeal are somewhat argumentative and mixed up
and, therefore, we find it difficult to give our decisions ground wise.
However, we have culled out the issues and summarized them in para 267. We
give our decision on those issues as follows:

i) There is business connection in India.

ii) There is no PE in India in the form of L.O., but there is a PE in the form
of the assessee's 100% subsidiary in India, viz., NIPL.

iii) The sale of hardware took place outside India and, therefore, no income
accrued to the assessee in India on the sale.

iv) The payment made for software is not in the nature of "royalty" and not
taxable either under the Act or under the DTAA.

v) The income-tax authorities were justified in assessing the interest income
on account of vendor - financing.

290.1. In the Department's appeals, the first ground relates to the
computation of the income attributable to the operations carried out in India.
The Department contends that 40% of the sales should be attributed to such
operations. In view of our discussion and decision in paragraphs 285 to 287,
the ground is partly allowed for both the years.

299.2. The second ground relates to the assessment of the payment for
software, which the Department wants to assess as "royalties". Since we have
held that the payments cannot be assessed either as royalties or as business
profits, the ground is dismissed.

290.3. The third and fourth grounds relate to the levy of interest under
sections 234A and 234B. The levy of interest under Section 234A is restored to
the file of the Assessing Officer with the directions contained in Para 74. As
regards Section 234B, the decision of the CIT (Appeals) on merits is upheld.
The third ground is allowed for statistical purposes and the fourth ground is
dismissed.

290.4. Thus, all the four appeals are partly allowed.

291\. We may place on record that we were very ably and assiduously assisted
by the learned counsel for both the sides indisposing of the appeals.

292\. Summing up the result of the entire order:

A. In the case of Ericsson:

(1) Assessee's appeal for assessment year 1997-98 in ITA No. 815/Del/01 is
allowed;

(2) Department's appeal for assessment year 1997-98 in ITA No. 1798/Del/01 is
partly allowed; and (3) Assessee's cross objection in C.O. No. 60/Del/01 is
allowed.

B. In the case of Motorola:

1\. Assessee's appeal for assessment year 1997-98 in ITA No. 2455/Del/01 is
partly allowed.

2\. Department's appeal for assessment year 1997-98 in ITA No. 2516/Del/01 is
partly allowed.

C. In the case of Nokia:

1\. The assessee's appeal in ITA No. 1963/Del/2001 is partly allowed.

2\. The Department's appeal in ITA No. 2511/Del/2001 is partly allowed.

For the assessment year: 1998-99:

1\. The assessee's appeal in ITA No. 1964/Del/2001 is partly allowed.

2\. The Department's appeal in ITA No. 2510/Del/2001 is partly allowed.

