

Supreme Court of India

C.B.I vs Keshub Mahindra on 11 May, 2011

Bench: S.H. Kapadia, Altamas Kabir, R.V. Raveendran, B. Sudershan Reddy, Aftab
Alam

    
    
                                                                         REPORTABLE
    
    
                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
    
    
                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
    
    
           CURATIVE PETITION (CRL.) NOS. 39-42  OF 2010
    
    
    
                                         IN
    
              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1672-1675 OF 1996
    
    
    
    
    
    C.B.I. & Ors.                                      ... Petitioner(s)
    
    
    
                                      versus
    
    
    
    Keshub Mahindra etc. etc.                            ...Respondent(s)
    
    
    
    
    
                                   O R D E R
    

S.H. KAPADIA, CJI

1\. These curative petitions are filed by Central Bureau of Investigation for
recalling the judgment and order dated 13.9.1996 of this Court in Keshub
Mahindra vs. State of M.P. (Criminal Appeal Nos. 1672-1675 of 1996 decided on
2 13.9.1996 reported in 1996 (6) SCC 129), on the following premises :

(i) When this Court, by the said judgment dated 13.9.1996 quashed the charges
framed against accused Nos. 2 to 5, 7 to 9 and 12 under Sections 304 (Part
II), 324, 326 and 429 IPC and directed the trial court to frame charges under
Section 304A IPC, this Court had before it adequate material to make out prima
facie, an offence chargeable under Section 304 (Part II) IPC. Therefore, this
Court committed a serious error in ignoring such material and quashing the
charge under Section 304 (Part II) IPC.

(ii) The evidence placed in support of the charge under Section 304A IPC
during the trial of the said accused before the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Bhopal showed prima facie that the said accused had committed
offences punishable under Section 304 (Part II) IPC. But for the said judgment
of this Court dated 13.9.1996, the learned Magistrate would have, by taking
note of the said  3 material, committed the case to the Court of Sessions
under Section 323 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short `the Code').
However, in view of categorical finding recorded by this Court, in its binding
judgment dated 13.9.1996 that there was no material for a charge under Section
304 (Part II) IPC and consequential quashing of the said charge, with a
direction to frame the charge under Section 304A IPC, the learned Magistrate
was barred from exercising his judicial power under Section 323 of the Code,
even though the Code vested the jurisdiction in him to alter the charge or
commit the case to the Court of Sessions as the case may be, on the basis of
evidence that came on record during the trial.

(iii) The judgment dated 13.9.1996 therefore resulted in perpetuation of
irremediable injustice necessitating filing of the curative petitions seeking
recall of the judgment dated 13.9.1996.

4

2\. On the night of December 02, 1984 there was a massive escape of lethal gas
from the MIC storage tank at Bhopal plant of the Union Carbide (I) Ltd. (UCIL)
into the atmosphere causing the death of 5,295 people leaving 5,68,292 people
suffering from different kinds of injuries ranging from permanent total
disablement to less serious injuries. On the day following the incident, the
SHO, Hanuman Ganj Police Station, suo moto, registered a Crime Case No. 1104
of 1984 under Section 304A IPC. On December 06, 1984 investigation was handed
over to the CBI, which investigation stood completed, resulting in filing of
charge sheets by the CBI in the Court of C.J.M., Bhopal on December 01, 1987.
Since the charge sheets inter alia alleged commission of offence under
Sections 304, 324, 326, 429 read with Section 35 of IPC, the case was
committed by the C.J.M. to the Sessions Court as Sessions Case No. 237 of 1992
(See : Order dated 30th April, 1992). On 8th April, 1993, the 9th Additional
Sessions Judge, Bhopal passed an order framing charges against the accused
Nos. 5 to 9 under Sections 304 (Part II), 324, 326 and 429 of  5 IPC and
against accused Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 12 under the very same Sections but with the
aid of Section 35 of IPC. It may be mentioned that at the time of framing of
charge, the Court had before it, accused Nos. 2 to 9 and accused No. 12 (UCIL)
whereas accused No. 1 (Warren Anderson) was absconding and the Court was also
unable to bring before it the other two companies, UCC and Union Carbide
Eastern Inc., accused Nos. 10 and 11.

3\. The accused after having unsuccessfully challenged the order framing
charge by the Court of Sessions before the Madhya Pradesh High Court, brought
the matter to this Court in four separate appeals in which the leading case
was Appeal (Cri.) No. 1672 of 1996 filed at the instance of accused No. 2
which stood ultimately disposed of by the judgment of the Division Bench of
this Court dated September 13, 1996 in the case of Keshub Mahindra (supra).
This Court held that on the material produced by the prosecution before the
Trial Court at the stage of framing of charges, no charges could have been
framed against the accused under Section 304 (Part  6 II) or under Sections
324, 326, 429 with or without the aid of Section 35 IPC and it accordingly
quashed the charges framed by the Sessions Court and directed that on the
material led by the prosecution the charge under Section 304A IPC could be
made out against accused Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 and under the same sections
with the aid of Section 35 against accused Nos.

2, 3, 4 and 12. Applications seeking leave to file a review petition being
Criminal Misc. Petition Nos. 1713-16 of 1997 in a proposed review petition
stood dismissed on March 10, 1997\. These applications were filed jointly by
Bhopal Gas Peedith Sangharsh Sahyog Samiti (BGPSSS), Bhopal Gas Peedith Mahila
Udyog Sangathan (BGPMUS) and Bhopal Group for Information and Action (BGIA).
The CBI/State of M.P. did not question the said 1996 judgment or filed any
review petition under Article 137 of the Constitution and instead proceeded
for the next 14 years to prosecute the accused under Sections 304A, 336, 337,
338 read with Section 35 IPC. It is only on 26th April, 2010, after the
defence evidence stood concluded and after conclusion of the oral  7 arguments
by the Senior Public Prosecutor, that, a petition was filed jointly by BGPSSS
and BGPMUS under Section 216 Cr.P.C. for enhancement of the charge to Section
304 (Part II) IPC. This application was not supported by CBI. The said
application was rejected by the C.J.M. on the same day.

However, this order of the C.J.M. was also never challenged under Section
397/399 or under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

Ultimately on June 7, 2010 Criminal Case No. 1104 of 1984 stood disposed of by
the C.J.M. vide his judgment convicting accused Nos. 2 to 5, 7 to 9 and 12
under Sections 304A, 336, 337, 338 read with Section 35 IPC and sentencing
them to two years' imprisonment. On June 29, 2010 Criminal Appeal No. 369 of
2010 was filed by State of M.P. before the Court of Sessions with a prayer for
enhancement of sentences under the existing charges. On the same day the State
of M.P. also filed Criminal Revision Application No. 330 of 2010 before the
Court of Sessions under Section 397 Cr.P.C., challenging the alleged failure
of the C.J.M. to enhance the charges to Section 304 (Part II) in exercise of
his jurisdiction under Section 216 Cr.P.C., and  8 to commit the trial of the
case to Sessions under Section 323 Cr.P.C. and inter alia praying for a
direction to enhance charges and commit. On July 29, 2010 Criminal Appeal No.
487 of 2010 was filed by the CBI before the Court of Sessions for enhancement
of sentences under the existing charges. On 23rd August, 2010, CBI filed the
criminal revision only after the present curative petitions were filed before
this Court on August 2, 2010. All the appeals and revisions remain pending
before the Court of Sessions.

4\. It is clear to us that in the criminal revisions filed by the CBI and the
State of M.P. the legal position is correctly stated.

But the curative petitions are based on a plea that is wrong and fallacious.
As noted above, one of the main planks of the curative petitions is that even
though in course of trial before the Magistrate, additional evidences have
come on record that fully warrant the framing of the higher charge (s) and the
trial of the accused on those higher charges, as long as the 1996 judgment
stands the Sessions Court would feel helpless in framing any higher charges
against the accused in the same way as the trial  9 court observed that in
view of the judgment of the Supreme Court no court had the power to try the
accused for an offence higher than the one under Section 304A of IPC. The
assumption is wrong and without any basis. It stems from a complete
misapprehension in regard to the binding nature of the 1996 judgment. No
decision by any court, this Court not excluded, can be read in a manner as to
nullify the express provisions of an Act or the Code and the 1996 judgment
never intended to do so. In the 1996 judgment, this Court was at pains to make
it absolutely clear that its findings were based on materials gathered in
investigation and brought before the Court till that stage. At every place in
the judgment where the Court records the finding or makes an observation in
regard to the appropriate charge against the accused, it qualifies the finding
or the observation by saying "on the materials produced by the prosecution for
framing charge". "At this stage", is a kind of a constant refrain in that
judgment. The 1996 judgment was rendered at the stage of sections 209/228/240
of the Code and we are completely unable to see how the judgment can be read
to say that it removed from the Code sections 323, 216, 386, 397,  10 399, 401
etc. or denuded a competent court of the powers under those provisions. In our
view, on the basis of the material on record, it is wrong to assume that the
1996 judgment is a fetter against the proper exercise of powers by a court of
competent jurisdiction under the relevant provisions of the Code. If according
to the curative petitioner, the learned Magistrate failed to appreciate the
correct legal position and misread the decision dated 13.9.1996 as tying his
hands from exercising the power under Section 323 or under Section 216 of the
Code, it can certainly be corrected by the appellate/revisional court. In
fact, the revision petitions though belatedly filed by the State of M.P.

and the CBI (which are still pending) have asserted this position in the
grounds of revision. Moreover, no ground falling within the parameters of Rupa
Ashok Hurra vs. Ashok Hurra 2002 (4) SCC 388 is made out in the curative
petitions. Also, no satisfactory explanation is given to file such curative
petitions after about 14 years from 1996 judgment of the Supreme Court.

The curative petitions are therefore dismissed.

11

5\. Nothing stated above shall be construed as expression of any view or
opinion on the merits of the matters pending before the learned Sessions
Judge, Bhopal.

.................................CJI (S. H. Kapadia)
...................................J.

(Altamas Kabir) ...................................J.

(R.V. Raveendran) ...................................J.

(B. Sudershan Reddy) ...................................J.

(Aftab Alam) New Delhi;

May 11, 2011

