

Delhi High Court

Kedar Nath Gupta vs J.K. Organisation on 6 November, 1997

Equivalent citations: 71 (1998) DLT 818

Author: S Kapoor

Bench: S Kapoor

JUDGMENT S.N. Kapoor, J.

(1) This CM(M) 69/77 takes exception to an order rejecting the application No.
2568/75 for registration of trade mark consisting of the words 'JAY KAY' in
class 6 in respect of locks, rolled and cast building materials, bolts, nuts,
screws, door hinges and nails for sale in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Mysore,
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.

(2) According to the petitioner Kedar Nath Gupta, the mark 'JAY KAY' is being
used by him since 1965. It is claimed that since 1948, the applicant was
working under the name and style J.K. Varshney&Co. He adopted the trade name
'JAY KAY' after his trading style 'Jay Kay & Company' for his manufactured
locks by adopting the initials of his father and his own name for the
customers and dealers in South India made clerical mistakes in the cheques in
mis spelling and word 'Varshney' in the year 1965. He claims to have following
sale turnover of his goods under the trade mark 'JAY KAY': Period Sale in Rs.
1965 1,11,000.00 1966 70,526.79 1967 89,673.45 1968 1,11,960.74 1969 (till
May) 8,475.59 THE appellant moved this application tor registration,
accordingly on 19.5.1969.

(3) After the trade name was advertised in the Trade Marks Journal No. 552
dated 1st June, 1972, Jk Organization, an association registered under the
Indian Trade unions Act, 1926 entered into opposition to the registration of
the aforesaid trade mark on 1st September, 1972. The grounds of opposition are
as under:

(I)The Jk Organization controls more than 40 industrial, commercial or
manufacturing concerns as members of their organization and have been using a
trade mark consisting of the letters 'J.K. ' or the word 'JAYKAY' within a
toothed wheel or without the device of a hand holding a hammer and other
device as a symbol trade mark of their Organization. The said trade marks have
been registered in the names of several of their units under Nos. 4227, 85062,
85063, 212257, B73262, 213693 and 212256 in classes 24, 26, 27, 22, 24, 16 and
23 respectively. It is a house mark of Jk Organization having a good deal of
reputation.

(II)By reason of this use on a large number of goods by the various
constituents units of the organization, the use and registration of the
applicant's mark is likely to deceive or cause confusion under Section 11(a)
and the applicant is not entitled to the benefit of Section 12(3) of the Act.
However, learned Counsel for the Objectors dropped the objection under Section
12(1) of the Act.

(4) This objection was contested by the applicant inter alia on the ground
that the opponents have no locus standi since it is a non-trading
organization. It is not entitled to maintain the opposition under Section 11
of the Act in the absence of reputation of the mark connected with them in the
course of the trade which is said to be deceptively similar.

(5) 5.1.The learned Assistant Registrar of the Trade Mark took the view that
the applicants have got substantial interest in use of the mark by 40
constituent units and it is their duty to protect their mark from any
unauthorised use outside the purview of these 40 constituent units. The Jk
Organisation could manufacture locks and sell in the market under the mark Jk
and people would be buying such locks as those manufactured by Jk Organization
member units within their industrial competence. Consequently, the mark is
barred by the provisions of Section 1(a) of the Act. He also held that in
order to take advantage of the name ofJK, the applicant changed its name by
deleting the word 'Varshney' and consequently, as provided under Section 11(e)
of the Act, the mark is not entitled to protection. The petitioners are not
the proprietor of the trade mark and as such the claim of the applicants
proprietary rights in the mark is not free from doubt within the meaning of
Section 18(1) of the Act.

5.2.The learned Assistant Registrar also raised the objection under section 9
of his own to find out distinctiveness and in the absence of distinctiveness,
refused to register in view of the provisions of Section 12(3) of the Act and
rejected the application.

(6) Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the petitioner Kedar Nath Gupta
has moved this petition challenging the impugned order inter alia on the
ground that the respondents themselves have dropped objection under Section
12(1) because the respondent had no trade mark of their own. The finding of
the Assistant Registrar that the respondent had locus standi to enter the
opposition having sufficient interest in respect of opposition under Section
11(a) of the Act is erroneous. It is for the opponents to prove that any
reputation has accrued to the respondents trade mark and it was likely to
cause confusion or deception in the normal course of trade. The opponent trade
union being a non-trading organization has no locus standi. The opponent trade
union could not have been equated with its members in respect of the use of
the said mark by the Association itself specially when none of the members
came to oppose and depose and/or lead any evidence to register its objection.
The learned Assistant Registrar has been extremely unfair in holding that the
mark is non-descriptive of appellants goods and under Section 9 and that it is
not entitled to protection as provided under Section 11(e) or that the
petitioner is not the owner of the trade mark and that it was of deceptive
character under Section 12(3).

(7) I have heard the parties Counsel at length and gone through the record.

(8) Before proceeding further, it is desirable to have a fresh look at the
concerned legal provisions. An application for registration of a trade mark is
filed under Section 18 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act. This section
reads as under:

18.Application for registration-(1) Any person claiming to be proprietor of a
trade mark used or proposed to be used by him, who is desirous of registering
it, shall apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for the
registration of his trade-mark either in Part A or in Part B of the register.

(2)An application shall not be made in respect of goods comprised in more than
one prescribed class of goods.

(3)Every application under Sub-section (1) shall be filed in the office of the
Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the principal place of
business in India of the applicant or in the case of joint applicants the
principal place of business in India or the applicant whose name is first
mentioned in the application, as having a place of business in India, is
situated: Provided that where the applicant or any of the joint applicants
does not carry on business in India, the application shall be filed in the
office of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the place
mentioned in the address for service in India as disclosed in the application,
is situate.

(4)Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the
application or may accept it absolutely or subject to such amendments,
modification, conditions or limitations, if any, as he may think fit.

(5)In the case of an application for registration of a trade mark (other than
a certification trade mark) in Part A of the register, the Registrar may, if
the applicant so desires, instead of refusing the application, treat it as an
application for registration in Part B of the register and deal with the
application accordingly.

(6)In the case of an refusal or conditional acceptances of an application, the
Registrar shall record in writing the grounds for such refusal or conditional
acceptance and the materials used by him in arriving at his decision.

(9) Section 19 provides for withdrawal of acceptance and Section 20 provides
for advertisement of the application. Section 21 of the Act provides for
opposition to registration. Section 21 reads as under:

21.Opposition to registration.-(1) Any person may, within three months from
the date of the advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for
registration or within such further period, not exceeding one month in the
aggregate, as the Registrar, on application made to him in the prescribed
manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, allows, give notice in writing in
the prescribed manner to the Registrar, of opposition to the registration.

(2)The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the applicant for
registration and, within two months from the receipt by the applicant of such
copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant shall send to the Registrar in
the prescribed manner, a counterstatement of the grounds on which he relies
for his application, and if he does not do so he shall be deemed to have
abandoned his application.

(3)If the applicant sends such counter-statement, the Registrar shall serve a
copy thereof on the person giving notice of opposition.

(4)Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be
submitted in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the
Registrar, and the Registrar shall given an opportunity to them to be heard if
they so desire.

(5)The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and
considering the evidence, decide whether and subject to what conditions or
limitations, if any, the registration is to be permitted, and may take into
account a ground of objection whether relied upon by the opponent or not.

(6)Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a
counter-statement after receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor
carries on business in India, the Registrar may require him to give security
for the costs of proceedings before him, and in default of such security being
duly given, may treat the opposition or application, as the case may be, as
abandoned.

(10) The applicant pressed his application ultimately for registration of
trade mark 'JAY KAY' confining it to locks in class 6 of the fourth schedule.

(11) The question for determination is: "whether in aforesaid circumstances
registration of trade mark 'JAY KAY' in respect of locks under class 6 would
cause any deception or confusion especially when neither the opponents nor any
member of their organization is manufacturing any article in class 6?"

(12) The name Jk has certainly acquired the reputation of belonging to a
particular group of industrialists having to do something with Jk
Organization. This fact is not under challenge. However, it is being contended
from the side of the appellant that neither the organization nor its members
are the owners of the trade mark 'J.K.' so far as lock is concerned and as
such it could be registered.

(13)

13.1.According to Section 18 of the Act, "Any person claiming to be the
proprietor of trade mark" could move an application for registration. The
emphasis is on the proprietary rights. If a similar complementary phrase is
sought to be seen in Section 21, which provides opposition to registration,
then the term "Any person" (indicating opponent/applicant) is not qualified by
the clause "claiming to be the proprietor of a trade mark". But he is required
to apply under Section 21 in a prescribed manner and the prescribed manner is
provided under the Rules 51 to 60 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Rules,
1959. A notice of opposition is required to be given in triplicate on form Tm
5. Rule 51 also requires that notice shall include the statement of the
grounds on which the opponent objects to the registration. This Tm 5 also does
not specify that an opponent should be the proprietor of the trade mark.
However, under Section 56, an application for rectification could be moved "by
any person aggrieved". Seeing Section 21, it appears that the omission of
phrase "claiming to be proprietor of trade mark" used in Section 18 or "any
aggrieved person" under Section 56 is intentional. While Section 18 is
confined to proprietor of a trade mark. Section 56 extends the arena to
include any aggrieved person like registered user of a trade mark or user of
certification trade mark. In this light, it appears that Section 21 of the Act
does not require that the opponent must be an aggrieved person.

13.2.The term "any person" in Section 21 of the Act came to be interpreted in
P.N. Mayor v. Registrar of Trade Marks, and it was held that "any person" need
not be only a prior registered trade mark owner. Even a customer, a purchaser
or a member of the public likely to use the goods may object to the
registration of a trade mark in respect of such goods on the ground of
possible deception or confusion. Deception or confusion is a matter of public
interest which is an important concern of the trade mark law.

13.3.The case of Karo step Trade Mark, 1977 Rpc 255 was also referred to. In
that case, there were seven members of the applicant association, who filed
application for rectification. Their locus standi was challenged on the ground
that they were non-trading body. The objection against the locus standi of the
Association was rejected for it was deemed appropriate that the applicant
Association on whom the responsibility rested for maintaining the rights and
obligations associated with the mark in general should have the locus to seek
rectification. In that case, goods were same and there was no argument about
any limitation or constraint, as has been argued before this Court in the
light of Section 15(c) of the Trade Unions Act.

13.4.MOLYSLIP Trade Mark case, 1978 Rpc 211 was also referred to. One Baron B.
controlled the South African Ship Group of Companies including the company
which owned the Molyslip mark. None of them were manufacturers but owners of
registered users marketing lubricant MOLYSLIP. Locus standi of the South
African Ship Group of Companies was disputed. Since the applicant themselves
have not traded in the relevant products, they did not qualify as persons
aggrieved. It was held that since this group had been closely involved in
South Africa as well as in Uk with that trader and came under the same
controlling interest, the applicants had locus standi to be heard on the
application for rectification, "being aggrieved person".

13.5.In this case also the group was trading in concerned product. In both the
cases Powell's Trade Mark (1894) 11 Rpc 4 was referred to on the construction
to be placed on the phrase 'person aggrieved'. The Act being a beneficial
legislation, even a consumer or consumer organization or any other
organisation can oppose registration of a trade mark, in so far as Section 21
is concerned. In so far as Section 21 is concerned, the finding of the learned
Assistant Registrar that any person may oppose an application for registration
of a trade mark and he need not be necessarily an aggrieved person, appears to
be justified.

(14) But at the same time, this by itself may not be sufficient in case
opponent suffers from any incapacity to file such opposition. This right may
be modulated and circumscribed by the limitations and constraints imposed
under the different enactments enabling deemed personalities to came into
existence by virtue of registration of persons like trade unions.

(15) The second plank/limb of the argument of learned Counsel for the
appellant/petitioner is founded on the alleged incapacity of the trade union
to contest such an opposition in a trade mark matter. It is contended that the
Jk Organization is not a 'person' for it has got no personality of its own.
According to the learned Counsel for the petitioner, the personality aspect
characterises the legal entity in question, i.e.. if it is a living individual
or a company or other corporate entity, it has a personality to be considered
as a person whereas it is a group of individuals such as members of a club and
an association, then it may not have the requisite personality to be a person.

(16) The learned Counsel for the appellant himself answers and shatters his
own argument when he contends that although the definition of a person under
General Clauses Act is wide enough to include an association of persons
whether incorporated or not. But he rightly submits such a person is subject
to specific legislation and if there is something repugnant with the concerned
specific legislation, the activities of such a person would be accordingly
modulated.

(17) According to the learned Counsel for the petitioner, the trade union is
not supposed to oppose or defend the registration of trade marks, specially in
terms of limitations imposed on a Trade Union under Section 15(c) of the Trade
Unions Act. In the light of the submissions of learned Counsel, it is to be
seen how far Section 15(c) of Trade Unions Act curtails the rights of trade
unions in opposing a registration of trade mark. Learned Counsel for the
petitioner contends on the authority of Senaji Kapur chAnd v. Pannaji
Devichand, Air 1930 Pc 300 that the word 'person' in section 4 of the
Companies Act, 1913 denoted individuals and did not include bodies of
individuals, whether corporate or not.

(18) For the purpose of having an overall view, one must not confine himself
to Clause (c) of Section 15 of the Trade Unions Act, but must see the entire
Section 15. This Section reads as under:

15.Objects on which general funds may be spent.-The generel funds of a
registered Trade Union shall not be spent on any other objects than the
following namely-

(A)the payment of salaries, allowances and expenses to office bearers of the
Trade Union;

(B)the payment to expenses for the administration of the Trade union,
including audit of the accounts of the genera funds of the Trade Union;

(C)the prosecution or defense of any legal proceeding to which the Trade union
or any member thereof is a party, when such prosecution of defense is
undertaken for the purpose of securing or protecting any rights of the Trade
union as such or any rights arising out of the relations of any member with
his employer or with a person whom the member employees;

(D)the conduct of trade dispute on behalf of the Trade Union or any member
thereof;

(E)the compensation of members for loss arising out of trade disputes;

(F)allowances to members of their dependents on account of death, old age,
sickness, accidents or unemployment of such members;

(G)the issue of, or the undertaking of liability under, policies of assurance
on the lives of members, or under policies insuring members against sickness,
accident or unemployment;

(H)the provisions of educational.social or religious benefits for members
(including the payment of the expenses of funeral or religious ceremonies for
deceased members) or for the dependents of members;

(I)the upkeep of a periodical published mainly for the purpose of discussing
questions affecting employers or workmen as such;

(J)THEpayment, in furtherance of any of the objects on which the genera funds
of the Trade union may be spent, of contributions to any cause intended to
benefit workmen in general, provided that the expenditure in respect of such
contributions in any financial year shall not at any time during that year be
in excess of one-fourth of the combined total of the gross income which has up
to that time accrued to the general funds of the Trade Union during that year
and of the balance at the credit of those funds at the commencement of that
year; and (K)subject to any conditions contained in the notification, any
other object notified by the appropriate Government in the Official Gazette.

(19) It appears from a reading of Section 15 that a trade union may pursue
prosecution or defense in legal proceedings only either under Clause (c) or
Clause (d) of Section 15. Clause (c) is confined to proceedings undertaken
"for the purpose of securing or protecting any rights of the Trade Union as
such or any rights arising out of the relations of any member with his
employer or with a person whom the member employs". Clause (d) relates to
"trade dispute" as defined in Clause (g) of Section 2 of the Trade Unions Act.
Section 2(g) of the Trade union Act reads as under: (G)"trade dispute" means
any dispute between employers and workmen or between workmen and workmen, or
between employers and employers which is connected with the employment or non-
employemnt, or the terms of employment or the conditions of labour, of any
person, and "workmen" means all persons employed in trade or industry whether
or not in the employment of the employer with whom the trade dispute arises;"

(20) Before proceeding further, meaning of the "trade union" as defined in
Section 2(h) should also be seen to appreciate the meaning of the phrase "for
the purpose of securing or protecting any rights of the Trade Union as such".
Section 2(h) of the Trade Unions Act reads as under:

(H)"Trade union" means any combination, whether temporary or permanent, formed
primarily for the purpose of regulating the relations between workmen and
employers or between workmen and workmen, or between employers and employers,
or for imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or
business, and includes any federation of two or more Trade Unions:

PROVIDED that this Act shall not affect - (i) any agreement between partners
as to their own business;

(II)any agreement between an employer and those employed by him as to such
employment; or (III)any agreement in consideration of the sale of the goodwill
of a business or of instruction in any profession, trade or handicraft.

(21) "TRADE Union" includes and embraces any combination formed primarily "for
imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or business"
aswell. Consequently, a Trade Union could protect rights of its members by
objecting to the registration of trade name or trade mark if intends to
protect the rights of the Trade Union for the said purpose of imposing
restrictions on the conduct of "any trade". The word "any" has a diversity of
meaning and may mean some; one out of many; an indefinite number. It may be
employed to indicate "all" or "every" as well as "some" or "one", and its
meaning in a given statute depends upon the context and subject of the
statute. "At any time" is commonly construed as meaning within reasonable
time; and as the words "any other" following the enumeration of particular
classes are to be read as "other such like," and include only others of like
kind or character, (see Black's Law Dictionary 6th Edition P.94). Seeing the
nature of the statute, its object and purpose and context, the term "any
trade" has to be confined to trades with which the Trade Union is concerned.
Consequently, the term "any trade" cannot mean all trades with which neither
the Trade Union nor its members are concerned; it could mean only "any
concerned trade". Since it is not the case of the opponent that the opponent
Trade Union or its members are dealing in any article of class 6 and locks
specifically, it does not appear plausible to accept that a Trade Union not
concerned with one trade should be allowed to prosecute or defend trade mark
matters in respect of another trade for Trade Union is not a pro bono publico
and is supposed to act within limitations and constraints of the Trade Unions
Act.

(22) Another limb of argument of learned Counsel for the appellant is that if
the Trade Mark 'J.K'. without being registered as certification mark under the
registered users provisions of Section 48 is being used by 40 organisations,
it would amount to trafficking in trade mark. Such a trade mark could not be
protected for there is neither any financial nor any contractual control of
the Jk Organisation over the trade mark licence agreements between it and its
members. In so far as the financial control and contractual control is
concerned, this does not appear to be very material in view of the language of
Section 21, as has been mentioned above. It is also submitted that mere
membership of an organization cannot permit the organization to oppose on
behalf of its members. To illustrate the absurdity, the learned Counsel
referred to a situation where a law firm by the name of "ABC" wished to sue
another firm who may have adopted the same name. High Court Bar Association
would not have any locus standi to oppose such a registration. In Consorzio
Del Prosciut to Di Parma v. Marks & Spencer Plc and Others, [1991] Rpc 351,
after referring to American Cynamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975] Ac 396 (HL),
Speeches of.Lord Diplock and Lord Fr ser of Tully belton in Warnink v.
Townend, Reckitt Colman Products Ltd. v. Borden Inc. [1990] l Wlr 491 and
Perry v. True fitt (1842) 6 Beav. 66, 73, observed as under:

"THERE was some debate in argument as to what precisely is the reputation for
which the consortium contends. For present purposes I think it is clear enough
that they contend that Parma ham is (1) a dry cured ham extracted from the
flank of a heavy adult hog, (2) of distinctive characteristics as to shape,
weight, colour when cut, aroma and flavour, (3) produced in the Parma region
of Italy, (4) which bears a visible seal of authenticity up to the point of
retail sale. For present purposes, the defendants do not contest any of these
features other than (4), since all the others are asserted features of the
pre-sliced and packaged ham which is sold by Marks & Spencer.

IN order to obtain a permanent injunction at the trial, the producers will
have to establish, first, that they have acquired in England a reputation in
the trade description "Parma ham" as one connoting ham sliced in the presence
of the retail purchaser from a leg bearing the Parma crown, secondly, that the
defendants have represented that Marks & Spencer's ham is ham of that
description in such a way as to confuse ordinary, sensible members of the
public or a section of them, and thirdly, that such confusion has caused or is
likely to cause damage to the producers. In order to obtain an injunction at
this interlocutory stage, the consortium must establish that there is a
serious question to be tried as to each of those three matters. If they do not
do that, the balance of convenience does not become an issue and no injunction
is appropriate.

ASto reputation, the producers will face the obvious difficulty that many
people's normal, perhaps their only, experience of Parma ham in this country
comes from consuming it in restaurants, where it is very rarely, it ever,
sliced off the leg in their presence. However, the judge accepted that the
evidence certainly disclosed that to some people in England Parma ham was
synonymous with a whole ham bearing the crown sliced in the presence of the
ultimate purchaser. That evidence came from people in the wholesale and retail
food trades, restaurateurs and publishers and writers of books on food. I am
not quite sure whether the judge was of the view that it established a serious
question to be tried as to the existence of the alleged reputation amongst a
section of the public, but for my part I am prepared to assume that it does."

(23) Seen in this light, it would appear that so long as the plaintiff/Union
does not claim that they have acquired in India a reputation in the trade
description Jay Kay locks, there could neither be any misrepresentation nor
could there be any confusion. There must be both. On this basis, the learned
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the registration of trade mark could
not be denied.

(24) In view of the foregoing discussion and the constraints and limitations
imposed on the trade union/opponent under the Trade Union Act, it is incapable
of raising any opposition but not in view of the language of Section 21 of the
Trade Unions Act.

(25) Moreover, registration of trade mark and trade certification marks being
confined to one prescribed class of goods under Section 18(2) and under
Section 62 read with Section 18(2), the contention of the learned Counsel for
the appellant appears to be justified. It is rightly contended that the
opponents should have got Jk registration as collective trade mark under
Section 60 of the Act as a certification mark in relation to specific goods
and not in relation to all goods. The opposition should have been filed by any
of the members of this organization manufacturing or dealing in goods to file
an opposition relying upon its registration or use or both. Since none of
these courses has been adopted, the opposition was not maintainable.

(26) It is further contended that for a trade mark which is as common as two
letters of alphabet, the Court could not grant exclusive rights so wide as to
cover unrelated goods such as locks. The term 'JK' not being an invented mark
it ought to have been strictly restricted to their goods. It is also contended
that none of the members of the Jk Organization have trade mark registration
or any user for locks or anything similar to locks. This submission is not
without force.

(27) In this regard, it could not be denied that the mark 'JAY KAY' being
phonetically close to the letters 'J.K.' would certainly cause confusion and
deception in case the opponents are dealing in the same goods. In this
connection, it has also been pointed out that the trade name/mark 'JAY KAY' is
being used for electrical cables, fabrics, watches, textile goods, machines,
stoves and spices by different persons other than the members of the opponent
Trade Union. It is not the case of the opponent that any one of its members is
dealing in locks and is registered for anything in class 6.

(28) Following a judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Synthes Ag Chur
& Ors. v. Rob Mathys India Pvt. Ltd., 1997(17)PTC(DB) 669 and seeing the
nature of the provisions laying emphasis on relation of trade mark with the
goods, I am of the definite opinion that any attempt by any trade or industry
to bask in the warmth of and make illicit profit and reputation not earned
legitimately by their own effort but built by others, has to be disapproved in
order to protect not only public interest of Indian consumers, private rights
of the traders but commercial morality as well. But this approach has to be
confined to same or similar products or at the most closely related products.
This approach cam-lot be extended to totally different kind of products. In
this latter area in order to protect the economic interests of manufacturers
of different kind of goods and the public interest, English rigidity appears
to be essential.

(29) It may further be mentioned that the absolute identity of the two
competing marks and their close resemblance is only one of the tests and not
the only test. Every case must depend on its own facts. The value of the
authorities lies not so much in the actual decision as in the tests applied
for determining what is likely to deceive or cause confusion in case of
commonly used words in trade descriptive of the name, colour or nature.
Quality of the goods, for like 'micro' and 'sun' could not be permitted to be
monopolized excepting when two or more such words are used as a composite
word. It may be mentioned that if a trade mark does not create any confusion
in relation to goods then it would be difficult to accept that a similar mark
is likely to deceive or cause confusion in relation to goods of others. It is
not the case of certification trade mark where it might have caused confusion
on account of simply on the pattern of franchise arrangement. It would be too
much to assume and presume such kind of relationship in a case where there is
no trade certification mark registered. Therefore, while reading Section
ll(a), this aspect cannot be ignored.

(30) No doubt, 'JK' may be the house mark of the Jk organization but this
house mark could only be confined to the goods to which there is registration
and not for all kinds of goods, for the Act does not recognise any collective
mark excepting certification trade mark" and for the present purpose in the
trade mark and certification trade mark both are related to goods and not
independent of goods, for the present purpose. The 'JK' trade mark, thus, may
have a particular bearing in respect of the registered trade marks in respect
of specified class of goods and not all the goods. Except the phonetic
similarity, no other thing is alleged to be common.

(31) The learned Assistant Registrar referred to the following observations of
Kerly in 10th edition at p.452: "...IT is not necessary, in order to find that
a mark offends against Section 11, to prove that there is an actual
probability of deception leading to a passing off or an infringement action;
it is sufficient if the result of the registration of the mark will be that a
number of persons will be caused to wonder whether it might not be the case
that the two products come from the same source. It is enough if the ordinary
person entertains a reasonable doubt."

(32) But it is apparent from the foregoing that "cause of wonder" must relate
to the same kind of goods, which are likely to be taken as coming from the
same source, though actually coming from different source. Here, no lock or
anything relating thereto is coming from the source of Jk organization and
therefore, there is no possibility of even wondering of a customer that the
locks are of one of the concerns of Jk organization. The fact that Jk
organization can manufacture locks in future, is certainly not going to help
for Jk could be the name of not only Jk organization but also of many
individual firms and concerns where name of one of the partners / their father
starts with the letter J and the name of other partner or. son starts from K.
There could also be name of an individual JK. Is it plausible to stop the use
of the letters "JK" or "Jay Kay" in registration of the different kinds of
goods of different classes on the plea of causing confusion and deception?

(33) In this regard, in response to the above question a number of authorities
have been cited at the Bar.

(34) The first is Dalip Chand Aggarwal & 0rs. v. M/s. Escorts Ltd., . In that
case, by a Division Bench of this Court, following observations were made:
12.It will thus be seen that in all these cases even though the opponent was
not manufacturing the goods of similar description for which registration of
the trade mark was sought by the applicant, the application was refused on the
ground that because of the reputation in the market of the opponents the goods
of the applicants may be taken to be those of the opponents. In the present
case admittedly the sales by the respondents of their various goods and which
are accepted in the market under the trade mark 'Escorts' have run into over
crores. The respondents are undoubtedly a well known manufacturing company and
have a reasonably known name. They had also started manufacturing goods even
of the same description as that of the applicant though it was in the range of
a few lakhs by 1963. The user by the appellant was undoubtedly very limited as
of his own showing it was to the tune of about 2" lakhs, though as pointed out
relevantly by the learned Judge the invoices did not relate to the period
subsequent to 1960. In that state of affairs it could not really be said that
there was an extensive user by the appellant as to satisfy the test of
concurrent user within the terms of Section 12(3) of the Act. It is no doubt
true that it is not necessary for the applicant's trade to be larger than the
opponent's but then the extent of the business along with the extent of the
business interest of the proprietor and the interest of the public have all to
be correlated in deciding whether applicant's mark should be registered or
not. In this connection it is relevant to note that there is no absolute right
to have the mark registered am if the Court is in any doubt that if the mark
will cause confusion, registratio; will be refused. There is of course no
fixed rule as to the minimum period of honest concurrent use necessary to lead
to registration. In Kerley's Law of Trade Mark and Trade Names', 9th Edition
at Article 340, it has been stated that there was no reported case in which a
period of concurrent use, so short as 2" years has been proved to be
sufficient to bring the application within the advantage of Section 12(2).
Even if this view was strictly applied and even smaller use was held to be
established from 1958 on which there is, to say the least, fair amount of
doubt the period would be too short to satisfy the test extent of user for the
purpose of Section 12(3) of the Act. It cannot be forgotten that the word
'Escorts' was in the market right from 1951 onwards with a very considerable
sale. It is correct that prior to 1961 the goods which were sold respondents
were different but that will not take the case out of Section 11 and would
atleast show some indication as to why the appellant had used the word
'Escorts'. Considering however, that the respondents were in field with the
trade mark even though of other goods from 1951 onwards and considering that
there was u very small amount of goods sold by the appellant in a period ofr a
year or two prior to the registration by the respondents, the onus which was
on inc applicant, was rightly held not to have been destroyed. We,
thererefore, sec no infirmity in the judgment of the learned Single Judge. The
appeal is, therefore, dismissed. There will be no order a- to costs.

(35) Next case referred to by the learned Counsel for the respondent is M/s.
jugmug Electric & Radio Co. v. M/s. Telerad Private Ltd., Ilr (1978) I Delhi
667. In that case, the respondent was the registered user of the Trade Mark
"TELERAD" in respect of radio receiving sets and component parts thereof.
However, the appellant also got registered the same trade mark "TELERAD"
subsequently in respect of domestic electrical appliances. The rectification
application under Section 56(1) was allowed and the registration granted in
favour of the appellant and the registration granted in favour of the
appellant was cancelled by Assistant Registrar. An appeal was filed. That was
also dismissed. On further appeal, a Division Bench of this Court after
considering the factors leading to deception or confusion under Section
11(a)(i) nature of the mark itself, (ii) the class of customers, (iii) the
extent of the reputation, (iv) the trade channels, etc. dismissed the appeal.
Following observations at p. 677 are relevant:

"WE have considered the strong relevance of the nature of the trade marks in
the relevant case. The class of customers are ordinary people who are not well
versed in the specific information as to what is manufactured by the
respondent and what is not manufactured by it. These customers go by the
general impression that electrical manufacturers often manufacture both the
types of goods and dealers sell both of them together. This leads to the
impression which is formed by the customers by a confusion or deception taking
place in their minds. We have also considered the trade channel and how it is
common to both these types of goods. We have shown that the connection between
the two is both at the manufacturing and at the marketing stages. Almost all
the factors which are relevant for consideration under section ll(a) are,
therefore, present in this case."

Thus, case was not decided on the basis of just phonetic similarity. Some
other factors leading to deception and confusion were also found present.
Besides, 'TELERAD' was an invented word.

(36) In M/s. Escorts Ltd. v. Surinder Nath & Ors., , the respondents applied
for registration of trade mark consisting of word 'Escorts' in class 9 in
respect of "Electric Wires and Cables". M/s. Escorts Limited filed objections,
being the registered proprietors of the trade mark 'Escorts' in various
classes for various types of goods manufactured by them. The appellants M/s.
Escorts Ltd. had been manufacturing some of the goods since 1951 under the
Regd. trade marks Escorts under various classes. The trade marks under
No.202188 was registered under class 9 for electric flats, irons and electric
kettles etc. The registered trade mark No-202190 besides others included
electric heating elements, heating tubes, water heaters and other items
mentioned in the certificate of registration. The trade mark "ESCORTS" applied
for under No. 241605 for "for electric wires and cables" by the respondent was
deceptively similar to appellants' registered trade mark 'ESCORTS'. The
Assistant Registrar as well as the High Court took the view that the
respondent's mark was deceptively similar to the appellant's registered trade
mark 'ESCORTS' and that M/s. Escorts Ltd. were using their mark prior to the
date of filing of the application of the impugned mark by the respondents and
further that on account of great reputation acquired by the appellant's mark
the use of an identical or deceptively similar mark by any other person is
bound to cause confusion or deception among the general public. But despite
this finding, the Assistant Registrar found that the respondent's goods namely
'electric wires and cables' could not be considered as goods of the same
description. He rejected the contention of the appellants that the
respondent's goods were allied goods. Dalip Singh v. Escorts' case (supra) was
relied upon by the learned Counsel for the respondent for, the objection under
Section ll(a) of the Act was found to be maintainable. Registration granted by
the impugned order was set aside and the appeal was allowed. On this basis, it
is submitted that the learned Assistant Register could not grant registration
under Section 12(3) of the Act.

(37) M/S. Fatima Tile Works & etc. v. M/s. Sutlarsan Trading Company Ltd. &
Am., was also referred to. But it does not touch upon the issues involved in
the present matter. Though, in response to the above question, above said
authorities have been cited, yet these authorities cannot be followed in view
of the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Vishnudas Trading as Vishnudas
Kishendas v. Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd., 1996 Ptc (16) 512. In this case,
M/s. Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd. has been manufacturing the brand name
cigarette Charminar and they were having the trade mark registered. However,
they did not manufacture anything other than cigarettes since 1942. On the
other hand, the appellant Vishnudas was manufacturing' quiwam 'and' zarda'
since 1973 and the appellant has been using the name 'Charminar' on his
bottles and boxes of 'Quiwam' and 'Zarda'. Appellant applied for registration
of 'Quiwam' and 'Zarda' under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 and
the rules made thereunder. The respondent company filed objections the trade
mark being in conflict with the registered trade mark of the respondent No.
9951 and 170427 obtained in 1942 and 1955. The registration was refused. The
appellants ultimately knocked the doors of the Supreme Court and the Supreme
Court in this. regard observed as under:

45."...In our view, if a trader or manufacturer actually trades in or
manufactures only one or some of the articles coming under a broad
classification and such trader or manufacturer has no bona fide intention to
trade in or manufacture other goods or articles which also fall under the said
broad classification, such trader of manufacturer should not be permitted to
enjoy monopoly in respect of all the articles which may come under such broad
classification and by that process preclude the other traders or manufacturers
to get registration of separate and distinct goods which may also be grouped
under the broad classification. If registration has been given generally in
respect of all the articles coming under the broad classification and if it is
established that the trader or manufacturer who got such registration had not
intended to use any other article except an article being used by such trader
or manufacturer, the registration of such trader is liable to be rectified by
limiting the ambit of registration and confining such registration to the
specific article or articles which really concern the trader or manufacturer
enjoying the registration made in his favour. In our view, if rectification in
such circumstances is not allowed, the trader or manufacturer by virtue of
earlier registration will be permitted to enjoy the mischief of trafficking in
trade mark. Looking to the Scheme of the registration of trade mark as
envisaged in the Trade Mark Act and the Rules framed thereunder, it appears to
us that registration of a trade mark cannot be held to be absolute, perpetual
and invariable under all circumstances. Section 12 of the Trade Marks Act
prohibits registration of identical or deceptively similar trade marks in
respect of goods and description of goods which is identical or deceptively
similar to the trade mark already registered. For prohibiting registration
under Section 12(1), goods in respect of which subsequent registration is
sought for, must be, (i) in respect of goods or description of goods being
same or similar and covered by earlier registration, and (ii) trade mark
claimed for such goods must be same or deceptively similar to the trade mark
already registered. It may be noted here that under sub-section (3) of Section
12 of the Trade Marks Act, in ein appropriate case of honest concurrent use
and/or of other special circumstances, same and deceptively similar trade
marks may be permitted to another by the Registrar, subject to such conditions
as may deem just and proper to the Registrar. It is also to be noted that the
expression "goods" and "description of goods" appearing in Section 12(1) of
the Trade Marks Act indicate that registration may be made in respect of one
or more goods or of all goods confirming a general description. The Trade
Marks Act has noted distinction between description of goods forming a genus
and separate and distinctly identifiable goods under the genus in various
other Sections, e.g., goods of same description in Section 46, Sections 12 and
34 and class of goods in Section 18, Rules 12 and 26 read with 4th Schedule to
the Rules framed under the Act.

46.The "class" mentioned in the 4th Schedule may subsume or comprise a number
of goods or articles which are separately identifiable and vendible and which
are not goods of the same description as commonly understood in trade or in
common parlance. Manufactured tobacco is a class mentioned in Class 34 of 4th
Schedule of the Rules but within the said class, there are number of
distinctly identifiable goods which are marketed separately and also used
differently. In our view, it is not only permissible but it will be only just
and proper to register one or more articles under a class or genus if in
reality registration only in respect of such articles are intended, by
specifically mentioning the names of such articles and by indicating the class
under which such article or articles are to be comprised. It is, therefore,
permissible to register only cigarette or some other specific products made of
manufactured tobacco as mentioned in Class 34 of 4th Schedule of the Rules. In
our view, the contention of Mr. Vaidyanatha that in view of change in the
language of Section 8 of the Trade Marks Act as compared to Section 5 of the
Trade Marks act, 194C, registration of trade mark is to be made only in
respect of class or genus and not in respect of articles of different species
under the genus is based on incorrect appreciation of Section 8 of the Trade
Marks Act and 4th Schedule of the Rules."

(38) In Roshan Lal Oil Mills Ltd. v. Assam Company Ltd., 1996 Ptc (16) 699, in
a similar situation relying on the judgment of Supreme Court in Vishnudas
Trading as Vishnudas Kishendas v. Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd., (supra),
Hon'ble Mr. Justice M.K. Sharma relating to similar trade mark 'JUMBO'
observed in paras 15, 16 and 17 as under:

15.In my opinion it could be said that there is on innocent resemblance of the
word 'JUMBO' between the two trade marks but it cannot be said that the
defendants have deceptively copied the trade mark in its letter and its
essential features. It appears to me the trade mark of the plaintiff denotes
'JUMBO' aeroplane whereas that of the defendant denotes 'JUMBO' elephant. The
idea is to convey super-power or strength in edible oils and tea respectively
and, therefore, it cannot be said that there is an imitation by the defendant
of the plaintiff's trade mark and that the defendant is using the same with
the sole object of diverting the business of plaintiff.

16.In this connection I may appropriately refer to the decision in the case of
Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola; 1942 (59) Rpc 127. In that case
the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly adopted
in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and commonly
used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that:

"THE distinguishing feature of the mark Coca-cola was coca and not cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not cola. It was not likely that any would confuse the word Pepsi with
Coca."

17.On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as Ia 8444/ 1994 stands dismissed. It is
made clear that the findings arrived at by me herein arc my tentative and
prima fade opinion and shall not be treated as my final and conclusive opinion
on the merits of the case.

(39) The case in hand is certainly better than the case of Vishnudas Trading
as Vishnu das Kishendas v. Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd., (supra) decided by
the Supreme Court for even it has not been shown that the respondents are
producing and manufacturing locks of that class and the facts of the case
appear to be the closest to the facts of the case of "JUMBO Edible OIL" and
"JUMBO TEA".

(40) It appears that simple similarity in the name in the trade mark alone is
not sufficient to make out a case either of infringement or of passing off for
in both the cases confusion or deception is the essential element. For
ascertaining confusion, one has to examine, (a) the nature of the two marks
including the letters used, the style of using letters, the devise in which
they have been used, the colour combination of the trade mark, (b) the class
of customers, (c) the extent of reputation, (d) the trade channels, (e) the
existence of any connection in the course of trade and, (f) all other
surrounding circumstances. No doubt, it is not essential that all such factors
should exist in each and every case to make out a case of passing off or
infringement or to deny the registration of similar trade mark. But at the
same time, it is also true that in case of presence of one single factor,
leading to alleged deception or confusion would by itself not be sufficient to
uphold the objection for registration of the trade mark.

(41) The names starting with letters ']' and 'K' being very common names, it
is submitted that it cannot be inferred that it would cause deception and
confusion in relation to different kinds of goods under Clause 'a' of Section
11. It is further argued that in case this kind of proposition is accepted,
then any letter and common words used by public in general could be
monopolised. Even 'Sun' and 'micro' could be monopolised by one or the other
firm.

(42) Causing confusion or deception must relate to the goods alongwith the
trade mark and not alone to the trade mark, is the submission of the learned
Counsel. It is rightly contended that the moment it is accepted that the
confusion and deception has to be in relation to the goods and that the
opponents were not producing locks nor they had got any trade mark registered
for the purpose of manufacturing the locks or anything of the Class 6, there
could neither be confusion nor deception nor it is possible to presume so.

(43) Changing the name from Jk Varshney & Company to Jk &: company does not
appear to be a sin prohibited, barred or punishable under the Trade Marks Act
and if the applicant could run the business of Jk Varshney & Company then by
changing from letters "JK" to "Jay Kay" he is also trying to distinguish the
resemblance with letters "JK" used by the members of the Jk Organization in
their trademarks. To say that removing "Varshney" did not appeal to the
rational mind on account of the confusion in spellings and consequential
delayed payments, does not appear to be very plausible. One could imagine the
deception and confusion if any member of the opponent was manufacturing
anything of the Class 6 but it is not possible to do so in the absence of
production of locks by any of its members.

(44) In regard to ownership of trade mark in relation to locks, a portion of
the observations of the learned Assistant Registrar is required to be
reproduced for the purpose of appreciating the evidence regarding
distinctiveness of the trade names and the locks. It reads as under:

"...I have seen the evidence filed by way of bill books and orders. The orders
are dated 1967 onwards and the bill books are from 1962. The user is claimed
from 1948. At no stage the user of the mark since 1948 is substantiated by
producing single document of sale of that year. Even the documents before me
do not disclose the consistent or systematic or continued sale of lock is
under this mark. The applicant hails from Aligarh and the sales are effected
in corner regions of South India. The sales appear to be sporadic and cannot
constitute sufficient base to provide necessary distinctiveness as stringently
required under the provisions of the Act to hold that the mark has become
sufficiently distinctive to be entitled to find a place in the Register to
enjoy the protection of the statue as provided in its preamble. Moreover, when
the mark is hit by the prohibition of Section 11, it cannot be deemed to be
distinctive as Kerly in his Footnote to page 171 of his 10th edition
commented. "Strictly a mark that offends against Section 11 or Section 12(1)
cannot be distinctive".

WITH regard to Section 12(3), it is well settled that mark should be
distinctive and concurrently used. The mark being of deceptive character, it
is extremely doubtful whether the same has been honestly adopted and
concurrently used so as to take the benefit of this Section. It is well
settled that the mark in double (?) should be refused as held by the House of
Lords in 7 Rpc 311. 1, therefore, hold that the mark is not entitled to any
protection or relief under the provisions of Section 12(3) of the Act."

(45) There are documents from p. 12 to p.83 such as telegrams, postcards,
letters and bills on record which do not substantiate the finding of the
learned Assistant Registrar. In the light of these documents, there does not
appear any reason to disbelieve the affidavit filed by Shri Kedar Nath Gupta
to indicate that he has been using the trade name Jay KAY' since 1965. It is
evident that he has been receiving letters since 1966 in the name of Jay Kay &
Company and booking orders of Jay Kay Jocks since 6th March, 1964. One fails
to understand that if such a large number of bills and letters could not
satisfy about the distinctiveness of the name of the locks of the applicant
and his proprietorship of the trade name, then what would satisfy the
Registrar of Trade Marks. Affidavits of Budh Sen Agarwal or Surendra Nath
Sharma do not disclose anywhere that at any point of time, they had produced
locks. The entire emphasis of their affidavits is that nobody should use the
letters 'J.K. ' or "JAY KAY' in trade name and trade mark for it has been
virtually monopolised by them in respect of all kinds of goods whether the
members of the opponent Trade Union are manufacturing or not or whether there
is registration of the trade mark or not. The moment this monopoly is rejected
in respect of goods other than the goods which the members of the opponent
Trade Union arc manufacturing and/or Trade Marks relating thereto, the
objection falls on ground.

(46) As regards the distinctiveness and proprietary rights of the plaintiff in
the trade mark of Jay Kay in locks, they are very well established by the
sales, bills and correspondence and other evidence on record.

(47) Now coming to the objection relating to Section 12(1) of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. This section reads as under: 12.Prohibition of
registration of identical or deceptively similar trade marks.-(1) Save as
provided in Sub-section (3), no trade mark shall be registered in respect of
any goods or description of goods which is identical with or deceptively
similar to a trade mark which is already registered in the name of a different
proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of goods." Emphasis
supplied) (48) This Section 12(1) specifically provides that in case of
concurrent user, identical or nearly resembling and deceptively similar trade
marks in respect of the same goods or description of goods may be registered
subject to certain reasonable conditions. This prohibition does not relate to
different kinds of goods, or goods having different description.

(49) In so far as the objection relating to Sub-section (3) is concerned, it
is not the case of the opponent that they are using the same trade mark in
respect of the same goods or description of goods.

(50) It is necessary to reproduce here Sub-section (3) of Section 12 of the
Act. It reads as under: (3)In case of honest concurrent use or of other
special circumstances which, in the opinion of the Registrar, make it proper
so to do, he may permit the registration by more than one proprietor of trade
marks which are identical or nearly resemble each other (whether any such
trade mark is already registered or not) in respect of the same goods or
description of goods, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as
the Registrar may think fit to impose.

(51) So long as there is no concurrent user or any other special circumstance
in respect of the same goods or description of goods, the Registrar could not
think it fit to impose any conditions or limitations. The Assistant Registrar
however could limit the registration in respect of locks and only in view of
the stand taken by the applicant himself.

(52) While one could not be oblivious to the expansionist approach of every
trader whether it is of the opponents or that of the applicant, the Registrar
of Trade Marks is not supposed to be swayed by these expansionist and extreme
approaches. Small fishes have a right to survive despite the existence of the
big fishes in the trade of different kinds.

(53) For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed and the Registrar of
Trade Marks is directed to register the trade mark of the petitioner limiting
the registration in respect of locks only for sale in the States of Uttar
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Mysore.

(54) In the peculiar circumstances of the case, parties are lift to bear their
own costs.

