

Bombay High Court

Encore Electronics Ltd., A ... vs Anchor Electronics And ... on 22 February,
2007

Equivalent citations: 2007 (5) BomCR 262, 2007 (109) Bom L R 639, MIPR 2007
(2) 84, 2007 (35) PTC 714 Bom

Author: D Chandrachud

Bench: R Khandeparkar, D Chandrachud

JUDGMENT D.Y. Chandrachud, J.

Page 0642

1\. The Defendant in a suit for infringement and passing off is in appeal
against an interlocutory order of injunction granted by the Learned Single
Judge on 23rd September, 1997.

2\. The Respondent before the Court instituted a suit for injunction
restraining the Appellant from in any manner using the mark "Encore" or any
other deceptively similar mark in relation to electrical or electronic goods
including dish antennae. The action was based on a case of infringement and
for passing off. The Plaintiff is a registered proprietor of various
trademarks including the word marks Anchor, Ankur, Anchor, Ankar, Anker, Ansor
and Ancor. Registration has been granted to the Plaintiff in respect of goods
falling in Classes 9 and 11 of the IVth Schedule to the Trademark Rules in
relation to a large number of electrical appliances and electronic goods. The
Plaintiff was incorporated on 11th June, 1990. The trademark "Anchor" which
forms the subject matter of the proceedings was first adopted in the year 1963
by Page 0643 the predecessor of the Plaintiff which was a partnership firm.
When the Plaintiff took over the business of the firm in 1990, the gross
annual turnover was in excess of Rs. 50 Crores and the products manufactured
and marketed under the "Anchor" mark included a wide range of electrical and
electronic items. Upon assignment of the mark to the Plaintiff, applications
were filed before the Registrar of Trademarks for bringing the name of the
Plaintiff on the record as the subsequent proprietor. The applications were
allowed. In 1990, the volume of sales in respect of electrical and electronic
goods on which the mark was used stood at Rs. 49.73 Crores. An amount of Rs.
1.19 Crores was expended in 1990 for advertisements and publicity for the
mark. The Plaintiff has used the mark "Anchor" either by itself or with the
device of an anchor on leaflets, literature, letterheads and publicity
material. The trademark of the Plaintiff is stated to have become "a household
word" and the products of the Plaintiff together with the associated mark are
stated to have been utilized in locations as diverse as government and public
buildings, cinema halls, schools, factories and private homes.

3\. According to the Plaintiffs it was in May 1992 that they learnt that the
Defendant had started dealing in dish antennae under the mark "Encore". A
notice was addressed by the Plaintiff on 7th May, 1992 to the Defendant
calling upon the Defendant to cease and desist from using the said mark. It
appears that the Defendant had come out with a public issue of share capital.
According to the Plaintiff it received queries from several sources enquiring
whether it was the Plaintiff that was associated with the issue of share
capital. According to the Plaintiff, the mark "Encore" is deceptively similar
to the registered mark of the Plaintiff and is being used in respect of the
same goods in respect of which the mark of the Plaintiff is registered.
Moreover, it has been averred that when the mark "Anchor" is pronounced or
written in Gujarati or Devanagari scripts, it appears "very close" to the
registered trademarks of the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff avers that the word
"Anchor" forms a part of its corporate name and trading style and has been
associated by traders and by members of the public, exclusively with the
Plaintiff. The corporate name, according to the Plaintiff, has acquired a
reputation in the market and the Defendant has adopted the corporate name and
style of "Encore Electronics Limited" which is deceptively similar, misleading
and liable to cause confusion.

4\. In the affidavit in reply, the Defendant states that it engages in the
manufacture of Cable T.V. Equipment and other electronic items. The Defendant
had applied for registration of its trademark "Encore" with the Registrar of
Trademarks on 20th July, 1992. The Defendant claims to have been known as a
manufacturer of Cable T.V. Equipment since 1989. According to the Defendant
the Plaintiff is a manufacturer mainly of electrical goods which are available
in a general hardware store whereas the Defendant manufactures sophisticated
electronic equipment catering to a specialized market. According to the
Defendant the maximum price of the Plaintiff's product would not exceed Rs.
1,000/-per piece whereas the dish antennae manufactured by the Defendant would
not cause less than Rs. 50,000/-for the smallest of the antenna manufactured.
The manufacture of dish antennae and other ancillary equipment is thus
according to the Defendant not similar Page 0644 to the product of the
Plaintiff. According to the Defendant it has established a substantial
presence in the market in the field of electronic goods like dish antennae.

5\. The Learned Single Judge by an order dated 23rd September, 1997 granted an
interlocutory injunction. The Learned Judge was of the view that both
phonetically as well as visually, the mark of the Defendant is similar to the
mark of the Plaintiff. Moreover, both in Gujarati and Devanagari scripts, the
word "Encore" is written in a manner similar to the word "Anchor". Hence, the
mark of the Defendant is according to the Learned Single Judge identical or
deceptively similar to the Plaintiff's mark "Anchor" and the adoption thereof
by the Defendant as a part of its trading style amounts to an infringement of
the Plaintiff's mark and a passing off of the goods of the Defendant as those
of the Plaintiff. The Learned Single Judge noted that there is no explanation
by the Defendant as to how it came to adopt the work "Encore" in the first
place. The user of the mark by the Defendant has been held not to be bonafide
and it has been found that the Defendant had deliberately adopted the mark to
trade on the reputation of the Plaintiff with the knowledge that the mark
"Anchor" is an established mark in respect of electrical and electronic goods.
The Learned Single Judge observed that the Plaintiff has spent a considerable
amount by way of publicity to popularize its trademark "Anchor". Due regard
has been had to the sales figures of the Plaintiff for the year 1990, and the
Defendant's user has been held not to be either honest or concurrent. The
Learned Single Judge has held that the Defendant is manufacturing dish
antennae on the one hand, while the Plaintiff is manufacturing electronic
goods and equipment including video-audio, MATV - CATV equipment and
accessories. All these have been held to be electronic items. Several items
are manufactured by the Plaintiff as well as the Defendant. While the
Plaintiff had produced material evidencing the extent of its business, no
sales figures have been placed on the record by the Defendant. Having regard
to all these circumstances, the Learned Single Judge was of the view that an
order of injunction was warranted.

6\. In assailing the order of the Learned Single Judge counsel appearing on
behalf of the Defendant submitted that in considering a case of deceptive
similarity, the rival marks have to be looked at as a whole. The Plaintiff, it
has been urged, essentially manufactures electrical switches while the
Defendant manufacturers dish antennae. The trade channels, customers as well
as the products manufactured are, it was submitted, different. The prices of
the rival products are different. It was submitted that a purchaser of the
Defendant's product would be a cable operator or a person in the trade while
on the other hand the Plaintiff does not manufacture dish antennae at all. The
approach of the Learned Single Judge was sought to be assailed and it was
urged that the Learned Judge had erred in splitting up the word marks of the
Plaintiff and the Defendant for the purposes of comparison. According to the
Defendant no material in support of the plea of deception has been forthcoming
and the letters on which reliance has been placed by the Plaintiff pertain to
the issue of share capital. Finally, it was sought to be urged that there is
no material on the record to show that the Plaintiff has an established
reputation in respect of electronic goods.

Page 0645

7\. On behalf of the Plaintiff the order of injunction passed by the Learned
Single Judge has been supported by adverting to the circumstance that the mark
"Anchor" has been used initially by the Plaintiff's predecessor and later, by
the Plaintiff, since 1963. Adoption by the Defendant of the mark was over 25
years thereafter since the year 1989. The sales figures of the Plaintiff
demonstrate an established business and the extent of advertising expenditure,
it was urged, would substantiate the goodwill associated with the mark of the
Plaintiff. Both the goods of the Plaintiff as well as the Defendant, it was
submitted fall in Class 9 of the IVth Schedule to the Trademarks Rules, 1958.
The mark of the Defendant, it was submitted, is visually, structurally and
phonetically similar to the mark of the Plaintiff. The Defendant, it was
submitted, has no cogent explanation for the adoption of a mark which is
deceptively similar, save and except to say that the mark used by the
Defendant is a French word. Finally, it was submitted that no sales figures
were placed before the Learned Single Judge by the Defendant nor is any ground
urged in the memo of appeal that though the sales figures were placed on the
record, they have not been duly noted in the order impugned in the appeal. The
learned Counsel submitted that whether a confusion is liable to be caused by
the use of the mark by the Defendant is ultimately a matter to be decided by
the Court and in the present case having regard to the substantial similarity
between the two marks a case for the grant of an interlocutory order of
injunction has been made out.

8\. While considering the merits of the rival submissions that have been urged
on behalf of the parties, at the outset we note that the use of the trademark
'Anchor' by the predecessor-in-title of the Plaintiff dates back to 1963. The
word 'Anchor' is an essential part of the corporate name of the Plaintiff. The
pleading before the Court is that the mark 'Anchor' has a distinctive
character and is associated both by traders as well as by members of the
public exclusively with the Plaintiff as regards electrical and electronic
goods. The mark 'Encore' was adopted by the Defendant nearly 25 years later,
in 1989. The sales of the Plaintiff increased from Rs. 6,300/-in 1964 to Rs.
1.76 crores in 1973, Rs. 10.12 crores in 1983 and by the year 1990 were to the
extent of Rs. 49.73 crores. The expenses incurred on advertising the
electronic and electrical goods sold by the Plaintiff were to the extent of
Rs. 1.19 crores in 1990. At the interlocutory stage, the Learned Single Judge
was, therefore, justified in drawing the inference that the mark 'Anchor' that
is used by the Plaintiff on electrical and electronic goods has acquired a
distinctive character. Associated with the mark is the goodwill and reputation
which connects the mark with the goods of the Plaintiff. By the time that the
suit was instituted in 1992, the goodwill had grown over a long period of
three decades during the course of which the mark was adopted, initially by
the predecessor- in-title of the Plaintiff and thereafter by the Plaintiff.
The submission of the Plaintiff that the goodwill and reputation associated
with the mark are significant enough to lead to the inference that the mark
'Anchor' is a household name reflective of the products which the Plaintiff
manufactures and sells can prima facie be accepted.

9\. The phonetic similarity between 'Anchor' on the one hand and 'Encore', on
the other, is striking. The two marks are phonetically, visually and Page 0646
structurally similar. The overall impression conveyed by a mark as a whole,
has to be assessed in evaluating whether the mark of the Defendant is
deceptively similar to the mark of the Plaintiff. Phonetic similarity
constitutes an important index of whether a mark bears a deceptive or
misleading similarity to another. The phonetic structure indicates how the
rival marks ring in the ears. Courts in a country such as ours whose culture
is enriched by a diversity of languages and scripts have to consider how the
rival marks are spelt and pronounced in languages in which they are commonly
used. Counsel for the Defendant submits before the Court that while 'Encore'
is a word of French origin, 'Anchor' is a word of English usage and the
pronounciation of the two words must differ. The submission misses the point.
The case before the Court is not about how an Englishman would pronounce
'Anchor' or a Frenchman would pronounce 'Encore'. The Court must consider the
usage of words in India, the manner in which a word would be written in Indian
languages and last but not least, the similarity of pronounciation if the
rival marks were to be pronounced in languages prevalent in the country where
the marks are used. The manner in which the 'a' as in 'anchor' is pronounced
by an Englishman on Notting Hill may well appear to a discerning traveller to
be distinct from a Frenchman's pronounciation of the 'e' in 'encore' on a
fashionable by lane near Champs Elysees. That is no defence to an action in
our Courts for passing off: For the ordinary consumer in Ahmedabad and her
counterpart in Mumbai's shopping streets, the 'a' in 'anchor' and the 'e' in
'encore' are perilously and deceptively similar. The Court must assess the
make up of an Indian consumer and, associated with that, the cultural traits
that underlie the spelling and pronouncation of words. The case of the
Plaintiff is that in Gujarati as well as in Hindi, there is not even a subtle
distinction between the manner in which 'Anchor' and 'Encore' would be
pronounced and we find merit in the submission. The overall impact in terms of
phonetical usage is one of striking similarity. The test is not whether a
customer who wishes to buy the product of the Plaintiff is likely to end up
buying the product of the Defendant. The test is whether the ordinary customer
is likely to be led to believe that 'Encore' is associated with the mark and
the trading style of the Plaintiff. The phonetical, visual and structural get
up of the two words is so strikingly similar as to lead to a likelihood of
deception. The question of deception is a matter for the Court to determine,
particularly at the interlocutory stage. The judgment of the Learned Single
Judge has been criticized on the ground that the Court attempted to break up
the words contained in the rival marks. We do not share that perception. What
the Learned Single Judge has done in the present case is to compare the two
rival marks and to emphasize a striking similarity between the marks with
reference to the common features of the rival words. That is a permissible
exercise and the judgment of the Learned Single Judge does no more than that.

10\. The Defendant has no bonafide or logical explanation for the adoption of
the mark. To merely assert that the mark of the Defendant has an origin in the
French language is no explanation whatsoever. That in our view, is merely an
afterthought to conjure up some justification for the adoption of a mark which
is deceptively similar. This is not a case where it can be said that there was
a bonafide, honest and concurrent use of the mark by the Page 0647 Defendant.
In the affidavit in reply to the Notice of Motion filed by a Director of the
Defendant, there are only broad generalities bereft of factual details. The
Defendant claims to be "a leading manufacturer of Cable TV Equipment in India"
and "to have now established a substantial presence in the market in the field
of electronics like Dish Antenna etc." (para 9). Significantly, in the
affidavit, there is absolutely no disclosure of the extent of the business,
sales or turn over of the Defendant. The Learned Single Judge was justified in
drawing an adverse inference against the Defendant on this ground. Common
field of activity

11\. One of the principal defences to the action for passing off in this case
is that the field of activity of the Defendant is not the same as that of the
Plaintiff. After all, the submission goes, the Plaintiff manufactures
electrical and electronic goods while the Defendant manufactures dish
antennae. Associated with the differences in the products manufactured, there
is, according to the Defendant a variation in the price range of the rival
products. The trade channels, it has been submitted, would be different and
the consumer who would purchase a product of the Plaintiff would not
necessarily be in the market for purchasing one of the dish antennae of the
Defendant. Conversely, a consumer who sets out to purchase a dish antenna
would not be in the same market as the one where the Plaintiff's electrical
and electronic goods are available for sale. So the submission is that there
is no likelihood of confusion.

12\. The submission requires an analysis of the issue whether a common field
of activity is an ingredient which is necessary in order to sustain a claim
for injunction in an action for passing off. An incisive discussion on the
origin of the common field of activity test is contained in a judgment of the
Court of Appeal in England in Harrods Limited v. Harrodian School Limited
(1996) R. P. C. 697. Millett, L.J. noted in the course of the judgment that
the expression "common field of activity" was enunciated in a judgment in
McCulloch v. May (1948) 65 R.P.C. 58 where Wynn-Parry J. dismissed a claim of
the Plaintiff for want of the factor. In Harrods the Court of Appeal, however,
noted that the application of this test was contrary to several previous
authorities, for example, Eastman Photographic Materials Co. Ltd. v. John
Griffiths Cycle Corporation Ltd. (1898) 15 R.P.C. 105 (cameras and bicycles)
and Walter v. Ashton (1902) 2 Ch. 282 (The Times newspaper and bicycles). The
Court of Appeal noted that the test in fact "is now discredited". The Court of
Appeal then observed that in several judgments the absence of a common field
of activity notwithstanding, the power of the Court to grant relief in an
action for passing off had been recognized:

In the Advocaat case Lord Diplock expressly recognised that an action for
passing off would lie although "the plaintiff and the defendant were not
competing traders in the same line of business". In the Lego case Falconer J.
acted on evidence that the public had been deceived into thinking that the
plaintiffs, who were manufacturers of plastic toy construction kits, had
diversified into the manufacture of plastic irrigation equipment for the
domestic garden. What the plaintiff in an action for passing off must prove is
not the existence of a common field of activity but likely confusion among the
common customers of the parties.

Page 0648

13\. The judgment of the Court of Appeal notes that while the absence of a
common field of activity is not fatal to an action for passing off, it is at
the same time an 'important and highly relevant consideration' in deciding
whether there is a likelihood of confusion. That is because the existence or
otherwise of a common field of activity would be relevant to determine whether
the public would associate a kind of association between the field of
activities of the Plaintiff and that of the Defendant. The extent of the
burden in such a case depends upon the prominence and goodwill associated with
the mark of the Plaintiff:

Where the plaintiff's business name is a household name the degree of overlap
between the fields of activity of the parties' respective business may often
be a less important consideration in assessing whether there is likely to be
confusion, but in my opinion it is always a relevant factor to be taken into
account.

14\. Where the relationship between the respective fields of activity of the
Plaintiff and the Defendant is only tenuous, the burden of proving the
likelihood of confusion and the resulting damage is heavy. The judgment of the
Court of Appeal recognizes that in a classic case of passing off where both
the Plaintiff and the Defendant are engaged in the same activity and the
Defendant represents his goods as being those of the Plaintiff, there is an
obvious risk of damage to the business of the Plaintiff by substitution. The
Plaintiff is liable to suffer a loss of his clientele, which transfers its
custom to the Defendant on the mistaken assumption that the goods of the
Defendant are in fact the goods of the Plaintiff. However, this is not the
only kind of damage that is liable to be caused to the goodwill of the
Plaintiff. When parties are not in competition with each other, the reputation
and goodwill of the Plaintiff may yet be damaged without a corresponding gain
to the Defendant. Millett L.J. noted that for example in the Lego case, a
customer who was dissatisfied with the plastic irrigation equipment of the
Defendant may be dissuaded from buying a plastic toy construction kit for his
children if he believed that it was made by the Defendant. "The danger in such
a case is that the plaintiff loses control over his own reputation". (at page
715).

15\. The departure from a strict application of the common field of activity
test is exemplified by the dictum contained in the judgment in Teleworks
Limited v. Telework Group PLC (2002) R. P. C. 27. The judgment inter alia lays
down the following principles:

(i) The action in passing off can, as the law stands, adequately protect the
development of a growing business. Thus if a claimant has at the relevant date
only a modest business in one or two lines of goods, he can still succeed in a
passing off action against a company selling other goods. It all depends on
whether the evidence establishes that purchasers would be led into the belief
that the defendant company was now selling these new goods.

(2) If the claimant's reputation at the relevant date is inadequate to induce
people to believe that the defendant's goods and services are the claimant's,
or connected with him, then that is the end of the matter. It is not right to
go on to consider evidence of future developments of the claimants' business.

Page 0649 (3) It is of course legitimate in a passing off case, as in any
other case where the protection of the court is sought by way of injunctive
relief, to look not only at the actual acts of the defendant, but his
threatened acts as well. If the evidence establishes a tangible threat by the
defendant to trade in a significantly different way from that in which it
currently trades, then it is right to consider whether that conduct, viewed
against the established reputation of the claimant, would be likely to give
rise to deception or confusion.

(4) There is no requirement in the law of passing off for the claimant and the
defendant to be operating in the same field. However, that is not to say that
the existence or otherwise of an overlap is not highly relevant to assessing
the evidence of misrepresentation. The question of whether two companies trade
in the same field can be affected by the level of particularity with which one
defines the field.

16\. The judgment of Mr. Justice Brightman in John Walker & Sons Limited v.
Rothmans International Limited and John Sinclair Limited 1978 F. S. R. 357
emphasises that a case of passing off may yet be established though the
Plaintiff and the Defendant do not trade in the same or an associated field.
In such a case there is no possibility of what is called product confusion -
in the case before the Court there the Judge noted that no one would purchase
the Defendant's cigarettes which were sold under the mark of Red Label
thinking that he was buying the Plaintiff's Red Label Whisky. That
notwithstanding, the use of a name in which the Plaintiff has acquired a
significant reputation with the public may warrant an order of restraint when
the use of a deceptively similar name by the Defendant may lead the public to
confuse that the product of the Defendant has associated with it the hallmark
of quality of the Plaintiff:

To put the matter in general terms, if one trader acquires a reputation with
the public in relation to a particular name or get-up, the use of that name or
get-up by another trader in either an associated field or even in a different
field may be restrained if the public may be confused into thinking that the
product or service of the other trader has the cachet of the first trader's
established name or get-up. This is to be distinguished from what may be
called product confusion. In the case with which I am concerned there is
obviously no possibility whatever of product confusion. No one would purchase
the defendants' Red Label cigarettes thinking that he was buying the
plaintiffs' Red Label whisky. The confusion, if any, is only that of name.

17\. Kerly's Law of Trademarks and Trade Names, Fourteenth Edition page 447
posits the principle of law that there is no rule that the Defendant must
operate in the same field of activity as the claimant. This, however, does not
mean that an examination of their respective fields of activity is irrelevant
since the more remote the activities of the parties, the stronger would be the
evidence needed to establish misrepresentation and the real likelihood of
damage that are the prerequisite of a right of action in passing off. The
judgment of the Supreme Court in Cadila Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. also indicates that the nature of the goods in respect of
Page 0650 which the trademarks are used and the similarity in the nature,
character and performance of the goods of the rival traders are factors to be
considered in the ultimate evaluation.

18\. In the present case, it is a matter of significance that the marks
registered by the Plaintiff fall in Class 9 and Class 11 of the IVth Schedule
to the Trade and Merchandise Marks Rules 1959. Clause 9, in particular is to
the following effect:

9\. Scientific, natural, surveying and electrical apparatus and instruments
(including wireless), photographic, cinematographic, optical, weighing,
measuring, signalling, checking (supervision) life-saving and teaching
apparatus and instruments; coin or counter- freed apparatus; talking machines;
cash registers; calculating machines; fire-extinguishing apparatus.

19\. The goods which are manufactured by the Defendant indeed fall in the same
class. In fact, the application for registration submitted by the Defendant on
20th July, 1992 was for the registration of a large body of goods consisting
of a whole range of apparatus and equipment falling in Class 9 of the IVth
Schedule. In the present case, therefore, it cannot be said that the field of
activity of the Defendant is so far removed from the field of activity of the
Plaintiff as to render the possibility of confusion remote enough to be
unworthy of judicial recognition. The rival fields are, on the contrary,
proximate. Undoubtedly, a possibility of product confusion may not exist where
the goods of the Defendant are not identical to the goods of the Plaintiff.
However, where as in the present case the fields of activity have a broad and
reasonable corelation, there is a likelihood of confusion in the sense that a
customer who seeks to purchase the goods of the Defendant is liable to believe
that associated with those goods is the hallmark of quality that has become
associated with the goods of the Plaintiff. Added to this circumstance is the
important consideration in the present case that the use of the mark "Anchor"
by the Plaintiff over a span of three decades has made it virtually a
household name in the field of electrical and electronic appliances. The
likelihood of confusion in such a case is amplified making it necessary for
the Court to protect the goodwill and the business reputation associated with
the mark of the Plaintiff. Phonetic Similarity

20\. The contention of the Defendant before the Court is that the mark of the
Defendant traces its origin to a French word ' encore' while the mark of the
Plaintiff is pure and simple, a word in the English language - 'anchor'. The
element of phonetic similarity has always been regarded in the law to be an
important index in an action for passing off. Where rival marks bear a close
phonetic resemblance the ingredients required for establishing deceptive
similarity would be found to exist. In the leading decision on the subject -
the Pianotist rendered as far back as 9th November, 1906 (1906 R. P.C. 774)
Mr. Justice Parker laid down a test which has been accepted by the Supreme
Court in India as well. The judgment in Pianotist tells us that the Judge
"must take the two words..." and that he " must judge of them, both by their
look and by their sound". Kerly's Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names,
Fourteenth Edition (page 600) summarizes the principle succinctly by stating
that it is both the ear as well as the eye that must be considered.

Page 0651

21\. The test of phonetic similarity was accepted in the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satya Deo . In Durga Dutt Sharma v. N.
P. Laboratories the Supreme Court held thus:

In an action for infringement, the plaintiff must, no doubt, make out that the
use of the defendant's mark is likely to deceive, but where the similarity
between the plaintiff's and the defendant's mark is so close either visually,
phonetically or otherwise and the Court reaches the conclusion that there is
an imitation, no further evidence is required to establish that the
plaintiff's rights are violated.

These principles were reiterated in a judgment of the Supreme Court in Cadila
Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. holding that the earlier
decision of a Bench of two Learned Judges in S. M. Dyechem Ltd. v. Cadbury
(India) Ltd. (2000)5 SCCC 573 which had taken a contrary view did not lay down
the correct position. The larger Bench in Cadila Health Care Ltd. held that it
was not correct in law to hold "that the principle of phonetic similarity has
to be jettisoned when the manner in which the competing words are written is
different". The Court held that both Amritdhara and Durga Dutt Sharma' s cases
(supra) had accepted the relevance of the test of phonetic similarity. In the
present case, the reliance placed in the course of the submissions on behalf
of the Defendant of its mark having an origin in a French word is, as already
noted in the earlier part of the judgment neither bonafide nor an honest
defence. The Court must have a realistic consciousness of the fact that both
the marks are used in the Indian market and it is a consumer in India whose
observation and assessment must guide the decision making. The manner in which
the rival marks would be ordinarily pronounced and the manner in which the
marks would be written in Indian languages constitutes an important indicator
of whether a case of deceptive similarity has been established. As the Learned
Single Judge stated both the marks contained an overwhelming emphasis on the
letters 'ncor' and the fact that the mark of the Plaintiff begins with an "a"
while the mark of the Defendant begins with an "e" would make little
difference to the manner in which the rival marks are pronounced. The manner
in which the marks would be written in the Gujarati and Devanagari scripts
bears a close resemblance - close enough for an intending purchaser of the
product of the Defendant to be led to believe that the goods of the Defendant
have associated with them the goodwill and reputation which is associated with
the mark of the Plaintiff.

22\. In these circumstances, the order passed by the Learned Single Judge
cannot be faulted. The Plaintiff has established a prima facie case for the
grant of an order of injunction. The essential requirements in an action for
passing off have been duly established. The balance of convenience lies in
favour of the Plaintiff. The large turn over of the Plaintiff is borne out by
the figures which have been disclosed in the plaint. The Plaintiff has
expended Page 0652 extensive sums of money in advertising and publicity.
Irreparable harm and prejudice is liable to be caused to the business of the
Plaintiff, unless an interlocutory order of injunction were to be passed as
prayed. The goodwill and reputation associated with the Plaintiff's mark,
cultivated as it has been over a period of three decades when the suit was
instituted would be liable to suffer serious damage unless the Defendant was
to be injuncted. The Learned Single Judge was not in error in granting an
interlocutory order of injunction.

23\. We do not find any reason to interfere. The Appeal shall accordingly
stand dismissed. Costs in the suit.

