

Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)

Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma vs State Of Bihar & Another Reported on 28
November, 2014

Author: Tapen Sen

8 28.11.2014 AB Court 34 C.R.M. 15023 of 2014 Re : An application for
anticipatory bail under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure filed on
29th October, 2014 in connection with Shyampukur Police Station Case No. 252
of 2014 Dated 02.09.2014 under Sections 406/420/341/323/506/120B of the Indian
Penal Code In re : Subrata Ghosh & Anr. ... Petitioners. Mr. Rajdeep Majumder,
Mr. Danish Haque ... for the Petitioners. Mr. Madhusudan Sur, Ld. APP, Mr.
Sujan Chatterjee ... for the State.

Ms. Priti Paul ... for the Defacto-complainant. This is an application for
grant of anticipatory bail in a case under Sections 406, 420, 341, 323, 506
and 120B of the Indian Penal Code.

We have heard the learned Counsel for the Petitioners as well as the learned
Counsel for the State and perused the Case Diary. Learned Counsel for the
Informant has also appeared. ALLOWED During the course of submissions, learned
Counsel for the State pointed out that the Petitioners have been twice served
with notice under Section 41A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the first of
which was on 13.10.2014 and the second being on 21.11.2014.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners points out that it is true that notice
under Section 41A was received on 13.10.2014 and the Petitioners did meet the
Investigating Officer, but in spite thereof, the said Investigating Officer
once again issued the second notice in a routine manner. His further
contention is that the Investigating Officer is attempting to compel the
Petitioners to compromise the matter with the Informant.

Learned Counsel has also drawn our attention to a judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court passed in the case of Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma Vs State of
Bihar & Another reported in 2000 C Cr. LR (SC) 293 in support of his
contention that in the face of the allegations, an offence under Section 420
and/or the other sections is not made out as there is a civil dispute.

Considering the aforementioned submissions and also the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in the case of Arnesh Kumar Vs State of Bihar
reported in 2014 (5) Supreme 324 = AIR 2014 SC 2756 and specially paragraph 14
thereof, we are of the view that the Petitioners, in the event of their
arrest, should be enlarged on bail.

Accordingly, we direct that in the event of arrest, the Petitioners shall be
released on bail upon furnishing a bail bond of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten
Thousand only) each with two sureties of the like amount, one of whom must be
local, to the satisfaction of the arresting officer and also subject to the
conditions laid down in sub-section (2) of Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and on further condition that the Petitioners will both meet
not the Investigating Officer, but the Officer-in-charge of the concerned
police station so that the investigation is not hampered in any way.

The application for anticipatory bail stands allowed.

(TAPEN SEN, J.) (INDRAJIT CHATTERJEE, J.)

