

Supreme Court of India

Bhavesh D. Parish & Others vs Union Of India And Another on 12 May, 2000

Author: Kirpal

Bench: M.B.Shah, B.N.Kirpal

    
    
               PETITIONER:
    BHAVESH D.  PARISH & OTHERS
    
    	Vs.
    
    RESPONDENT:
    UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT:	12/05/2000
    
    BENCH:
    M.B.Shah, B.N.Kirpal
    
    
    
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

KIRPAL,J.

The appellants who carry on the business of shroffs are impugning the validity
of Section 9 of the Reserve Bank of India Act as amended by the Amendment Act,
1997 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) on the ground that the said
provision is violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of
India.

The trade of business of shroffs in India has been in existence for a long
time. This trade is carried on not only in cities but also in small towns and
villages in parts of India.

The appellants are shroffs engaged in the business of providing credit to the
members of the public. The traditional mode of organising the business of
shroffs over the past several decades had been by way of partnership firms.
The nature of the services practised by the appellants generally involved
maintaining a mutual current account where the customer may either place
deposit on call or withdraw money on call, without security. The financing
activity of the shroff firms was through capital contributions of the
partners/proprietor and deposits made by members of the public. Some of the
other activities of the shroffs include cheque discounting, the issuance of
hundis, the collection of cheques from different centres and providing other
similar facilities to customers. The services extended by the appellants are
availed of by small and medium sized traders, professionals, salaried workers,
agriculturists and individuals.

The Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as the RBI) is a statutory
corporation constituted as the Central Banking Authority for the country by
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. The RBI is constituted, inter alia, to
regulate the issue of bank notes and keeping of reserves with a view to
securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency and
credit system of the country to its advantage. The RBI is also vested with
various powers to regulate the currency and credit system of the country. The
powers so vested in RBI include the power to issue directions to non-banking
institutions receiving deposits and to financial institutions. By amendment in
1963 a new Chapter III-B was inserted in the said Act. This chapter inserted
Sections 45-H to 45-Q which were provisions relating to non-banking
institutions receiving deposits and financial institutions. In the Statement
of Objects and Reasons it was provided that the existing enactments relating
to banks did not provide for any control over companies or institutions,
which, although were not treated as banks, accept deposits from the general
public or carry on other business which was allied to banking. For ensuring
more effective supervision and management of the monetary and credit system by
the RBI, it was observed that the RBI should be enabled to regulate the
conditions on which deposits may be accepted by these non- banking companies
or institutions. The provisions of the said chapter III-B did not apply to
individuals or firms like the appellants who are not incorporated but still do
business which is akin to that of banking.

In order to place some restrictions on the acceptance of deposits by
unincorporated bodies, by the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983 (Act 1 of
1984), Chapter III-C and Section 58-B(5A) were inserted into the Act. The
relevant portion of principal restrictions in Chapter III-C which were
contained in Section 45-S, read as under: Deposits not to be accepted in
certain cases. 1) No person being an individual or a firm or an unincorporated
association of individuals shall at any time, have deposits from more than the
number of deposits specified against each, in the table below:

TABLE (i) Individual Not more than twenty-five depositors excluding depositors
who are rel ativ es of the individual.

ii) Firm Not more than twenty-five depositors per partner and not more than
two hundred and fifty depositors in all, excluding, in either case, depositors
who are relatives of any of the partners.

iii) Unincorporated Association of individuals. Not more than twenty five
depositors per individual and not more than two hundred and fifty depositors
in all, excluding, in either case, depositors who are relatives of any of the
individuals constituting the association.

2\. Where at the commencement of Section 10 of the Banking Laws (Amendment)
Act, 1983, the deposits held by any such person are not in accordance with
sub-section (1), he shall, before the expiry of a period of two years from the
date of such commencement, repay such of the deposits as are necessary for
bringing the number of deposits within the relative limits specified in that
sub-section.

The constitutional validity of Section 45-S of the Act was upheld by the Delhi
High Court in Kanta Mehta VS. Union of India and others 1987 (62) Company
Cases 769. The main challenge was on the ground that it infringed the
appellants right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India and was
violative of Articles 14 & 19 of the Constitution. While upholding the
validity of Section 45-S, the High Court noted that expert reports by study
groups had recommended that it would not be in the interest of all, especially
the depositors, if unincorporated bodies such as partnerships were to work as
companies without any control or supervision of the RBI. This decision of the
High Court was affirmed by this Court in T. Velayudhan Achari and Another Vs.
Union of India and others (1993) 2 SCC 582. While upholding the validity of
Section 45-S, this Court at page 591 observed as follows:

No doubt, the impugned legislation places restrictions on the right of the
appellants to carry on business, but what is essential is to safeguard the
rights of various depositors and to see that they are not preyed upon. From
the earlier narration, it would be clear that the Reserve Bank of India, right
from 1966, has been monitoring and following the functioning of non-banking
financial institutions which invite deposits and then utilise those deposits
either for trade or for other various industries. A ceiling for acceptance of
deposits and to require maintenance of certain liquidity of funds as well as
not to exceed borrowings beyond a particular percentage of the net-owned funds
have been provided in the corporate sector. But for these requirements, the
depositors would be left high and dry without any remedy.

It appears that Section 45-S of the Act, as originally incorporated, did not
have the desired effect. The non-corporate sector was virtually free from all
disciplines even though its activities were same or similar to the corporate
sector, the difference only being in the magnitude and that too only in some
cases. According to the respondents it was to rectify this imbalance that
first an ordinance was issued which sought to completely prohibit any receipt
of deposits by unincorporated associations in the non- corporate sector. When
certain hardships were pointed out by those who did not carry on the business
comparable to the companies which were under Chapter III-B i.e. who did not
borrow money or receive advances to carry on business in the financial sector
but borrow money for their own trade or manufacture, the Act, which replaced
the ordinance, watered down the rigour to some extent.

The newly incorporated Section 45-S, which is impugned in this writ petition,
is as follows:

45-S (1) No person, being an individual or a firm or an unincorporated
association of individuals shall, accept any deposit:

(i) If his or its business wholly or partly includes any of the activities
specified in clause Â© of Section 45-I; or

(ii) If his or its principal business is that of receiving of deposits under
any scheme or arrangement or in any other manner, or lending in any manner.

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the receipt
of money by an individual by way of loan from any of his relatives.

(2) Where any person referred to in sub-section (1) other than a body
corporate holds any deposit on the Ist day of April, 1997 which is not in
accordance with sub- section (1), such deposit shall be repaid by that person
immediately after such deposit becomes due for repayment or within two years
from the date of such commencement, whichever is earlier.

(3) On and from the date of Ist day of April, 1997, no person referred to in
sub-section (1) shall issue or cause to be issued any advertisement in any
form for soliciting deposit.

Explanation For the purpose of this section:

(a) A person shall be deemed to be a relative of another if, and only if :

(i) they are members of a Hindu undivided family; or

(ii) they are husband and wife; or (iii) the one is related to the other in
the manner indicated in the list of relatives below:-

List of relatives

1\. Father 2. Mother (including step-mother) 3. Son (including step-son), 4.
Sons wife, 5. Daughter (including step-daughter), 6. Fathers father, 7.
Fathers mother, 8. Mothers mother, 9. Mothers father, 10. Sons son, 11. Sons
sons wife, 12. Sons daughter, 13. Sons daughters husband, 14. Daughters
husband, 15. Daughters son, 16. Daughters sons wife 17 Daughters daughter 18.
Daughters daughters husband 19. Brother (including step- brother), 20.
Brothers wife, 21 Sister (including step-sister), 22. Sisters husband.

The principal features of the amended Section 45-S in so far as they relate to
the appellants are:

(a) From 1.4.1997, no individual or firm may accept any deposit: (i) if his or
its business wholly or partly includes financing activities, whether by way of
making loans or advances or otherwise; or (ii) If his or its principal
business is that of receiving deposits under any scheme or arrangement or
lending in any manner. (b) The prohibition on the acceptance of deposits does
not apply to loans from relatives. (c) A company may continue to accept
deposits for financing activities or lending subject to the regulations in
respect of Non-Banking Financial Companies.

(d) Individuals and firms holding deposits on 1.4.1997 must repay such
deposits immediately after such deposits become due for repayment or within
two years (before 31.3.1999), whichever is earlier. (e) On and from 1.4.1997
no individual or firm may issue advertisement in any form for soliciting
deposits. (f) All non-banking financial companies must have a minimum of Rs.
25,00,000 of net owned funds (NOF) and withdraw the deposits and/or take loans
before the agricultural operations commence. The agriculturists and small
traders who earn valuable interest on net deposits will no longer be able to
do so.

The impugned Section 45-S does not in any way prohibit or restrict any
unincorporated body or individual from carrying on the business that it likes.
It is open to unincorporated bodies to carry on their financial business
either from their own funds or the funds borrowed from their relatives or from
financial institutions. The restriction, which is placed by Section 45-S, is
on the carrying on of such business by utilising public deposits.

The grievance of the appellants is that the firms of or individual shroffs, as
a result of amendment to Section 45-S, will not be allowed to accept any
deposit from the public for the purposes of their business activities. There
is a complete prohibition on sharafi transactions (mutual current account
transactions) which had formed the bedrock of the financing activities of the
shroffs. This is because individuals and firms will no longer be entitled to
accept deposits on current account and the minimum period for which a non-
banking financial company may accept deposit is now one year. The shroffs will
now be compelled to convert from partnership firms into limited companies.

Challenging the virus of Section 45-S, it was submitted by the learned counsel
for the appellants that shroffs provided the facility of deposit and loan
transactions 24 hours a day and this facility was traditionally extended to
customers like agriculturists, such as cotton farmers, tobacco farmers,
vegetable producers etc. who had a seasonal need for finance and a periodic
surplus of investible funds. The flexibility of deposit and withdrawal of the
funds available to this sector which was provided by the shroff community will
now cease. It was submitted that the impugned provisions are violative of the
appellants right to carry on their trade and business guaranteed under Article
19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Elaborating this contention it was urged that
though it is open to the Government to impose reasonable restriction in the
public interest under Article 19(6) of the Constitution but impugned
provisions neither met the test of reasonableness nor public interest . It was
also submitted that the impugned provisions were violative of Article 14 of
the Constitution being artbitrary, discriminatory and un-reasonable.

This Court in Papnasam Labour Union VS. Madura Coats limited and another
(1995) 1 SCC 501 while considering challenge to Section 25-M of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 of being violative of Article 19 of the Constitution
referred to earlier decisions of this Court and at page 511 set out the
following principles and guidelines which should be kept in mind for
considering the constitutionality of statutory provision upon a challenge on
the alleged vice of unreasonableness of the restriction imposed by it:

a) The restriction sought be imposed on the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by
Article 19 of the Constitution must not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature
so as to go beyond the requirement of felt need of the society and object
sought to be achieved.

b) There must be a direct and proximate nexus or a reasonable connection
between the restriction imposed and the object sought to be achieved.

c) No abstract or fixed principle can be laid down which may have universal
application in all cases. Such consideration on the question of quality of
reasonableness, therefore, is expected to vary from case to case.

d) In interpreting constitutional provisions, courts should be alive to the
felt need of the society and complex issues facing the people which the
Legislature intends to solve through effective legislation.

e) In appreciating such problems and felt need of the society the judicial
approach must necessarily be dynamic, pragmatic and elastic.

f) It is imperative that for consideration of reasonableness of restriction
imposed by a statute, the Court should examine whether the social control as
envisaged in Article 19 is being effectuated by the restriction imposed on the
Fundamental Rights.

g) Although Article 19 guarantees all the seven freedoms to the citizen, such
guarantee does not confer any absolute or unconditional right but is subject
to reasonable restriction, which the Legislature may impose in public
interest. It is therefore necessary to examine whether such restriction is
meant to protect social welfare satisfying the need of prevailing social
values.

h) The reasonableness has got to be tested both from the procedural and
substantive aspects. It should not be bound by processual perniciousness or
jurisprudence of remedies.

j) Restriction imposed on the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 19
of the Constitution must not be arbitrary, unbridled, uncanalised and
excessive and also not unreasonably discriminatory. Ex hypothesi, therefore, a
restriction to be reasonable must also be consistent with Article 14 of the
Constitution.

k) In judging the reasonableness of the restriction imposed by clause (6) of
Article 19, the Court has to bear in mind Directive Principles of State
Policy.

l) Ordinarily, any restriction so imposed, which has the effect of promoting
or effectuating a directive principle, can be presumed to be a reasonable
restriction in public interest.

Keeping the aforesaid principles in mind let us now examine the reasons for
enacting Section 45-S.

In the affidavit filed by the respondent it has been, inter alia, stated that
the growing volume of deposits with unorganised financial sector affected the
operation of monetary and credit policy to the extent that it involved a loss
of control by the central monetary authority on the use of these funds.
Further, the unincorporated bodies were susceptible to default as the costs of
funds and returns could not be matched in a viable way leading to adverse
selection i.e. the funds being directed to risky illiquid investments. Whereas
incorporated bodies were subject to regulatory controls, it was impossible to
regulate unincorporated bodies at all. It is also stated in the affidavit that
over the years, the functioning of various unincorporated bodies was under
observation and in 1984 when Chapter III-C was added to the Act, the
prohibition to accept deposits was partial in the sense that unincorporated
bodies were allowed to accept deposits from a limited number of depositors
with no ceiling on the amount of deposit. The working of the provisions of
Chapter III-C did not result in healthy development but there was a
proliferation of such unincorporated bodies engaged in financial
intermediation. As pointed out in para-3 of the Statement of Objects and
Reasons the existing provisions were flouted by unscrupulous entities by
floating different partnership firms when a firm reached the level of 250
depositors. This multiplication of firms took place with a view to circumvent
the rigour of the law.

It appears that after the introduction of Section 45-S in 1984, several
complaints were received by the RBI from various parts of the country
regarding rampant mal-practices being adopted by several persons/firms
especially in the State of Kerala. Sample studies, which were conducted,
revealed several astonishing features and the menace of such unincorporated
associations accepting public deposits and the mushroom growth of such
intermediaries. These business firms were commonly known in Kerala as blade
companies so called because of their usurious lending rates. The study showed
that these blade companies drew sustenance from human greed. These blade
companies were offering interest of 36% and in turn were charging excessive
interest from the borrowers. By the time the study was conducted, it showed
that the private financing scenario in Kerala pointed out to near desolation.
Where as in 1987 the daily newspapers and periodicals were filled with flashy
advertisements for attracting business subsequently most of the firms had dis-
appeared. Public confidence had been shattered beyond description and the fate
of several depositors stood sealed with the tragedy which had over- taken on
them having lost their hard earned money. Similarly complaints were also
received by the RBI of individuals/firms and unincorporated bodies accepting
deposits in Tamil Nadu. The report received from that State recommended that
the RBI should over-see the functioning of such financial firms and it ought
to consider banning the activities in public interest.

It is the case of the RBI that the flexibility, convenience and facilities
etc. provided by the appellants were turning out to be mirages for the
gullible public who ultimately had to bear the burnt of the callous ways in
which the unincorporated bodies extended credit under the guise of flexibility
and convenience. Unquestionably high interest rates were charged by such firms
from the borrowers, but when the time came for the return of money borrowed by
such firms, a number of such firms had folded up resulting in great loss to
the depositors. The RBI, being a statutory expert body entrusted with monetary
management, came to the conclusion that these unincorporated bodies which were
functioning as financial intermediaries in an informal and unorganised manner
be restrained from having access to deposits from public. The spread of formal
financial agencies such as, commercial banks, regional rural banks,
cooperative banks, development financial institutions and non-banking
financial companies etc. had taken care of the need to mobilise the domestic
savings of the nation and to deploy the same in a proper manner.

As regards availability of banking facilities in small towns and villages is
concerned, the number of rural branches of commercial banks, which were 1833
in June, 1969, increased to 33069 as on June, 1996. The average population per
branch has increased manifold. The regional rural banks had been established
in 1975 with a view to serve the people. Several State Governments had
promoted cooperative banking culture amongst the rural masses for effectively
taping the resources so as to meet their credit requirements. It appears that
the institutional finance is available far more easily now than before. With
these facilities now being available and in view of the inherent risks to the
general public at the hands of the unincorporated bodies engaged in financial
activities and accepting public deposits, we agree that the restrictions now
imposed by the amended Section 45-S cannot be considered as being un-
reasonable.

As has already been observed, there is no total prohibition or ban from
accepting deposits by incorporated bodies. It is only such incorporated bodies
as are carrying on business referred to in Clauses I and II of sub-section (1)
of Section 45-S of the Act which cannot accept deposits from the public. They
can however receive loans from relatives. The appellants cannot claim a
fundamental right to carry on the business of financing with other peoples
money. In other words, there can be no unrestricted fundamental right to
accept deposits from the public. This Honble Court has observed in Peerless
General Finance and Investment Co. Limited and Another Vs. Reserve Bank of
India and others [ 1992(2) SCC 343] that there is no fundamental right to do
any unregulated business with subscribers/depositors money. This Honble Court
in that case upheld the directions issued by RBI requiring residuary non-
banking companies to invest the amount collected by them as deposits in a
particular way. This Honble Court further held that such companies should
invest their own working capital and find such resources elsewhere with which
the Reserve Bank has no concern. Since the deposit acceptance by
unincorporated bodies is incapable of being regulated by virtue of the large
number of such bodies, the provisions in the nature of the amended Section
45-S are necessary and unincorporated bodies should do their business with
their own money or institutional finance or money borrowed from relatives.

The amended Section 45-S further expands the provisions of Chapter III-B by
making it necessary for all those, who mobilize public funds for deployment in
the financial sector, to follow the norms of prudential management which is
the internationally accepted practice in relation to those handling public
funds. In view of Chapter IIIB, particularly in its revised form after the
amendment, it would have been highly incongruous to permit people to side step
the discipline of Chapter IIIB by refusing to incorproate themselves. In view
of this anomaly which has come about it was decided by the legislature not to
permit such activities in the non- corporate sector. Nothing prevented the
appellants who alleged to be the partners of different firms from
incorporating themselves as a company. The real grievance was that the
appellants did not want to comply with the norms of prudential management and,
therefore, sought to paint a picture as though their trade had been
prohibited. There was no impediment in the trade as long as it was carried on
within the norms of Chapter IIIB. In fact, they would have greater latitude to
do trade as a corporate body, in that the present restriction on the amount of
money to be deposited would stand increased. In this context, it may be
emphasised that there is absolutely no restriction on any person to utilise
his own funds (including the funds received from his relatives) for any
purpose he likes including para banking or financial activity.

Historically, only banks have been allowed to accept deposits repayable on
demand because they were subjected to maintenance of cash reserve requirement
which would enable them to meet liabilities as and when they are called upon
or when any demand is made for repayment. Since non-banking financial
companies were not subjected to such cash reserve requirement, it was not
desirable to allow non-banking financial companies to accept demand deposits.
In any case, such bodies were nothing but para banking institutions and either
they had to be regulated on the lines of the financial institutions and if
that was not feasible, they should have appropriately been prohibited from
accepting deposits from public. After all, the right to raise public deposit
could not be construed as a fundamental right. The restrictions imposed cannot
be considered unreasonable or arbitrary.

The RBI has not acted hastily. Before amending Section 45-S of the Act in
1997, it had the benefit of having with it the reports of number of
committees, all of whom had recommended that the unincorporated business
firms/individuals be brought under certain discipline and, if possible, non-
banking financial business was not to be permitted to be carried on by the
unincorporated bodies. It will be useful in this regard to refer to the report
of the study group on non-banking financial intermediaries appointed by the
Banking Commission in 1971. The study group after making a detailed study of
the then existing non-banking financial intermediaries stated in respect of
unincorporated bodies in para 8.25 of its report as under:

8.25 We, therefore, suggest that the Reserve Banks control may be extended to
finance corporations and necessary enabling legislation be passed to that
effect. We recognise that the administrative task of watching and regulating
the operations of a large number of small firms will be difficult. We,
therefore, suggest that if the law permits, only companies may be allowed to
do the banking business in the sense of accepting deposits from the public for
the purpose of lending or investment. IN that case, the Banking Regulation Act
would govern the operations of the Bangalore type finance corporations. If,
however, the law does not permit it, any scheme of regulation may have as one
of its objections the reduction in the number of finance corporations besides,
of course, the safeguarding of depositors interest.

It was further submitted that the amendments were introduced after taking into
account the recommendations of successive committees, appointed by the Bank
and Government of India, which had studied the functioning of these bodies.
The question of restricting such financial activity by unincorporated bodies,
is a question of economic policy as it involves regulation of economic
activities by different constituents. In such matters of economic policy, this
Honble Court does not interfere with the decision of the expert bodies which
have examined the matter. The following observations of this Honble Court made
in R.K. Garg Vs,. Union of India, 1982 (1) SCR 947 at 969 are appropriate:

Another rule of equal importance is that laws relating to economic activities
should be viewed with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such as
freedom of speech, religion etc. It has been said by no less a person than
Holmes,J. that the legislature should be allowed some play in the joints,
because it has to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution
through any doctrinaire or straight jacket formula and this is particularly
true in case of legislation dealing with economic matters, where, having
regard to the nature of the problems required to be dealt with, greater play
in the joints has to be allowed to the legislature. The court should feel more
inclined to give judicial deference to legislature judgment in the field of
economic regulation than in other areas where fundamental human rights are
involved. Nowhere has this admonition been more felicitously expressed than in
Morey V. Dond (354 US 457) where Frankfurther J. said in his inimitable style:

In the utilities, tax and economic regulation cases, there are good reasons
for judicial self-restraint if not judicial deference to legislative judgment.
The legislature after all has the affirmative responsibility. The courts have
only the power to destroy, not to reconstruct. When these are added to the
complexity of economic regulation, the uncertainty, the liability to error,
the bewildering conflict of the experts, and the number of times the judges
have been overruled by events self limitation can be seen to be the path to
judicial wisdom and institutional prestige and stability.

The court must always remember that legislation is directed to practical
problems, that the economic mechanism is highly sensitive and complex, that
many problems are singular and contingent, that laws are not abstract
propositions and do not relate to obstract units and are not to be measured by
abstract symmetry that exact wisdom and nice adaptation of remedy are not
always possible and that judgement is largely a prophecy based on meager and
uninterrupted experience. Every legislation particularly in economic matters
is essentially empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call
trial and error method and therefore it cannot provide for all possible
situations or anticipate all possible abuses. There may be crudities and
inequities in complicated experimental economic legislation but on that
account alone it cannot be struck down as invalid.

At page 988 it is further held:

That would depend upon diverse fiscal and economic considerations based on
practical necessity and administrative expediency and would also involve a
certain amount of experimentation on which the court would be last fitted to
pronounce. The court would not have the necessary competence and expertise to
adjudicate upon such an economic issue. The court cannot possibly assess or
evaluate what would be the impact of a particular immunity or exemption and
whether it would sere the purpose in view or not.

Even if these restrictions incorporated in the Act amount to a total
prohibition, such action was necessary in the public interest as the mushroom
growth of unincorporated bodies accepting deposits had gone beyond control
calling for restriction of the nature imposed by the amended Section 45-S. In
the case of Reserve Bank of India Vs. Peerless General Finance and Investment
Co. Ltd. and others (1987) 61 Company Cases 663, this Honble Court took
judicial notice of and expressed concern about the mushroom growth of such
bodies by referring to the advertisements issued by various such bodies in the
press. While upholding the constitutional validity of the Prize Chits and
Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 (Srinivasa Enterprises Vs. Union
of India, 1980 (4) SCC 507) this Honble Court pointed out that for saving the
poor and unwary public from the unscrupulous racketeers who glamourise and
prey upon the gambling instinct to get rich through prizes, banning was
necessary. The court observed how can you save moth from the fire except by
putting out the fatal fire ? On the same analogy for safeguarding or
protecting the public from the loss which was likely to be caused to them by
the failure of unincorporated bodies promising high returns, it was necessary
to prohibit unincorporated bodies from accepting deposits from the public.
Further, as observed by this Court in Srinivas Enterprises case (supra) it is
a constitutional truism that restrictions in extreme cases should be pushed to
the point of prohibition, if any lesser strategy will not achieve the purpose.

It cannot be denied that shroffs have played an important roll in providing
finance in the rural sector and in small towns. But, despite the services
which they may have rendered, it is difficult to accept the contention that
the RBI was not justified in imposing ban on unincorporated bodies accepting
deposits from public while carrying on financing business. The inherent danger
to the public specially in small towns and villages in permitting such
business to be carried on un-checked and un-regulatory was ample justification
for the impugned legislation, keeping in mind the experience of the public
which had been dealing with such unincorporated bodies in Kerala and Tamil
Nadu. It is open to the appellants to organise their business within the
permissible legal set up by forming non- banking financial corporations and
functioning in accordance with Chapter III-B of the Act and the directives
issued by the Bank from time to time. The prohibition on partnership firms to
carry on their business like that of shroffs cannot be regarded as being an
unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the appellants to carry
on their trade. They can continue lending money as long as they do not borrow
from the public.

The services rendered by certain informal sectors of the Indian economy could
not be belittled. However, in the path of economic progress, if the informal
system was sought to be replaced by a more organised system, capable of better
regulation and discipline, then this was an economic philosophy reflected by
the legislation in question. Such a philosophy might have its merits and
demerits. But these were matters of economic policy. They are best left to the
wisdom of the legislature and in policy matters the accepted principle is that
the courts should not interfere. Moreover in the context of the changed
economic scenario the expertise of people dealing with the subject should not
be lightly interfered with. The consequences of such interdiction can have
large-scale ramifications and can put the clock back for a number of years.
The process of rationalisation of the infirmities in the economy can be put in
serious jeopardy and, therefore, it is necessary that while dealing with
economic legislations, this Court, while not jettisoning its jurisdiction to
curb arbitrary action or unconstitutional legislation, should interfere only
in those few cases where the view reflected in the legislation is not possible
to be taken at all.

Examining the validity of the amended Section 45-S of the Act by applying the
principles enunciated over the years by this Court, and as encapsuled in the
passage quoted in the earlier part of this judgment from this Courts decision
in Papnasan Labour Unions Case (supra) we find that the said Section is in no
way illegal or bad in law. Section 45-S no doubt prohibits the conduct of
banking business by an unincorporated non-banking entity like a shroff, but
this prohibition has come about, inter alia, in the interest of unwary
depositors and borrowers (from shroffs) and with a view to prevent them from
committing financial suicide. Earlier attempts to adequately regulate the non-
banking institutions not having achieved the desired result of protecting
large number of depositors from unincorporated financial institutions which
would suddenly mushroom overnight and then vanish without a trace, but taking
with it depositors money, left the RBI with no alternative but to prohibit
such unincorporated entities from conducting financial business which was more
than akin to banking.

The restrictions imposed against acceptance of deposits by unincorporated
bodies carrying on financial activity or the business of deposit acceptance or
lending in any manner are in the larger interest of general public vis a vis
few persons accepting such deposits. The need for such restrictions had become
acute and imperative in view of large scale mis-management of public funds by
such unincorporated bodies.

Accordingly, we hold that the provisions of Section 45-S of the Act are valid.

Before we conclude there is another matter to which we must advert to. It has
been brought to our notice that Section 45- S of the Act has been challenged
in various High Courts and few of them have granted the stay of provisions of
Section 45-S. When considering an application for staying the operation of a
piece of legislation, and that too pertaining to economic reform or change
then the courts must bear in mind that unless the provision is manifestly
unjust or glaringly unconstitutional, the courts must show judicial restrain
in staying the applicability of the same. Merely because a statute comes up
for examination and some arguable point is raised, which persuades the courts
to consider the controversy, the legislative will should not normally be put
under suspension pending such consideration. It is now well- settled that
there is always a presumption in favour of the constitutional validity of any
legislation, unless the same is set- aside after final hearing and, therefore,
the tendency to grant stay of legislation relating to economic reform, at the
interim stage, cannot be understood. The system of checks and balances has to
be utilised in a balanced manner with the primary objective of accelerating
economic growth rather than suspending its growth by doubting its
constitutional efficacy at the threshold itself.

While the courts should not abrogate its duty of granting interim injunctions
where necessary, equally important is the need to ensure that the judicial
discretion does not abrogate from the function of weighing the overwhelming
public interest in favour of the continuing operation of a fiscal statute or a
piece of economic reform legislation, till on a mature consideration at the
final hearing, it is found to be unconstitutional. It is, therefore, necessary
to sound a word of caution against intervening at the interlocutory stage in
matters of economic reforms and fiscal statutes.

A number of petitions had been filed in this Court seeking transfer of writ
petitions pending in different High Courts. By order dated 17.2.2000, those
Transfer Petitions were dismissed as not pressed. Besides the writ petitions,
in respect of which, those transfer petitions had been filed, a number of
other petitions are pending disposal in various High Courts. In quite a few of
them the High Courts have granted an interim injunction staying the operation
of the implementation of the amended Section 45-S of the Act. For the view we
have taken now, it is imperative that these petitions, pending in the
different High Courts, are formally disposed off at an early date. We,
therefore, request all the High Courts, in which the petitions are pending
challenging the provisions of Section 45-S, to dispose them of within a period
of three months. Needless to say inasmuch as the validity of Section 45-S has
been upheld by us, the said provision shall be liable to be enforced
notwithstanding any interim orders to the contrary which may have been passed
by any High Court, which interim order must necessarily now loose all its
significance.

For the aforesaid reasons, this writ petition is dismissed. The respondents
will be entitled to costs.

