

Rajasthan High Court

Rajasthan Cylinders & Containers ... vs Cit on 5 July, 2002

Equivalent citations: (2002) 176 CTR Raj 614

JUDGMENT By the Court On an application under section 256(1) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961, the Tribunal has referred the following question for our opinion :

"Whether the Tribunal was right in law in holding that the assessee-company
was not entitled to carry forward of loss computed for the assessment year
1985-86 ?"

2\. The assessee is a limited company. The assessee-company claims to have
made an application in Form No. 6 for extension of time on 28-6-1985, for
filing the return which was due to be filed on 30-6-1985. In the application
the time sought was uptill 30-9-1985. In the return, the assessee has shown a
loss of Rs. 25,82,740. The assessment was, however, completed computing total
loss of Rs. 9,71,561. The business loss was only Rs. 8,095 while the
depreciation to be carried forward was Rs. 9,55,371. The Income Tax Officer
did not allow to carry forward the loss determined, while making the
assessment on the ground that returns were not filed on or before the due
date. Commissioner (Appeals) as well as the Tribunal both have confirmed the
view taken by assessing officer. When the returns were not filed or before due
date, assessee is not entitled for carry forward of loss.

2\. The assessee is a limited company. The assessee-company claims to have
made an application in Form No. 6 for extension of time on 28-6-1985, for
filing the return which was due to be filed on 30-6-1985. In the application
the time sought was uptill 30-9-1985. In the return, the assessee has shown a
loss of Rs. 25,82,740. The assessment was, however, completed computing total
loss of Rs. 9,71,561. The business loss was only Rs. 8,095 while the
depreciation to be carried forward was Rs. 9,55,371. The Income Tax Officer
did not allow to carry forward the loss determined, while making the
assessment on the ground that returns were not filed on or before the due
date. Commissioner (Appeals) as well as the Tribunal both have confirmed the
view taken by assessing officer. When the returns were not filed or before due
date, assessee is not entitled for carry forward of loss.

3\. Heard learned counsel for the parties. Mr. Ranka, learned counsel for the
assessee, submits that once the application for extension of time in Form 6
has been submitted before the assessing officer on or before the due date, if
that application has not been rejected and communicated to the assessee, the
presumptions will be that time has been extended. Application for extension of
time has not been rejected in the case in hand, the time prayed for extension
till 30-9-1985, the assessee can fill the return till 30-9-1985, and that be
treated that return of income has been filed on or before due date. Admittedly
the returns were filed on 5-8-1985, i.e., before 30-9-1985, and once the
returns were filed before the period sought for extension of time to file the
return, there is no question of saying that returns are not filed within due
date. When the return are filed on or before the due date, the Income Tax
Officer should allow the carry forward of losses.

3\. Heard learned counsel for the parties. Mr. Ranka, learned counsel for the
assessee, submits that once the application for extension of time in Form 6
has been submitted before the assessing officer on or before the due date, if
that application has not been rejected and communicated to the assessee, the
presumptions will be that time has been extended. Application for extension of
time has not been rejected in the case in hand, the time prayed for extension
till 30-9-1985, the assessee can fill the return till 30-9-1985, and that be
treated that return of income has been filed on or before due date. Admittedly
the returns were filed on 5-8-1985, i.e., before 30-9-1985, and once the
returns were filed before the period sought for extension of time to file the
return, there is no question of saying that returns are not filed within due
date. When the return are filed on or before the due date, the Income Tax
Officer should allow the carry forward of losses.

4\. Learned counsel for the assessee Mr. Ranka placed reliance on the decision
of Calcutta High Court in the case of CIT v. Janta Film Exchange (P) Ltd.
(1993) 202 ITR 532 (Cal). Mr. Singhi has not brought to our notice any
relevant decision which shows that once the application is filed for extension
of time and that is pending with the Income Tax Officer, it is to be presumed
that time sought for in the application has been extended.

4\. Learned counsel for the assessee Mr. Ranka placed reliance on the decision
of Calcutta High Court in the case of CIT v. Janta Film Exchange (P) Ltd.
(1993) 202 ITR 532 (Cal). Mr. Singhi has not brought to our notice any
relevant decision which shows that once the application is filed for extension
of time and that is pending with the Income Tax Officer, it is to be presumed
that time sought for in the application has been extended.

5\. The admitted facts are that returns are due to be filed on or before
30-6-1985. On 28-6-1985, the assessee had filed the application in Form No. 6
for extension of time till September, 1985, and returns showing loss has been
filed on 5-8-1985, as before 30-9-1985. The consistent view taken by various
High Courts that once the assessee has applied for extension of time in Form
No. 6 and if that application has not been disposed of or rejected, the
presumption will be that the time has been extended and if assessee has filed
the return on or before the extended time prayed for, the return shall be
taken to be filed on or before due date. In this case, when the application
has been submitted for extension of time on 28-6-1985, and that has not been
rejected, it shall be presumed that the time has been extended till 30-9-1985,
and in this case, admittedly the returns are filed on 5-8-1985, therefore, it
cannot be said that the returns are not filed on or before the due date.

5\. The admitted facts are that returns are due to be filed on or before
30-6-1985. On 28-6-1985, the assessee had filed the application in Form No. 6
for extension of time till September, 1985, and returns showing loss has been
filed on 5-8-1985, as before 30-9-1985. The consistent view taken by various
High Courts that once the assessee has applied for extension of time in Form
No. 6 and if that application has not been disposed of or rejected, the
presumption will be that the time has been extended and if assessee has filed
the return on or before the extended time prayed for, the return shall be
taken to be filed on or before due date. In this case, when the application
has been submitted for extension of time on 28-6-1985, and that has not been
rejected, it shall be presumed that the time has been extended till 30-9-1985,
and in this case, admittedly the returns are filed on 5-8-1985, therefore, it
cannot be said that the returns are not filed on or before the due date.

In our view, the Tribunal has committed error in disallowing the claim of the
assessee holding that returns are not filed on or before the due date.

In the result, we answer the question in negative i.e., in favour of the
assessee and against the revenue.

The reference so made stands disposed of accordingly.

OPEN

