

Supreme Court of India

Union Of India (Uoi) vs Dharamendra Textile Processors on 19 July, 2007

Bench: S Kapadia, B S Reddy

JUDGMENT

1\. Delay condoned.

2\. Leave granted in special leave petitions.

3\. In this batch of civil appeals, the question which arises for
determination is whether Section 11AC of the Centra). Excise Act, inserted by
Finance Act, 1996 with the intention of imposing mandatory penalty on persons
who evade payment of tax, should be read to contain mens rea as an essential
requirement.

4\. According to the department, the said section should be read as penalty
for statutory offences; that the executing authority had no discretion in the
matter of penalty and that the adjudicating authority in such cases was duty
bound to impose penalty equal to the duty so determined. On the other hand, it
is the case of the assessee that mens rea was an essential requirement of the
said section particularly when the section refers to intention in the matter
of evading payment of duty. The assessee has also invited our attention, in
this connection, to the provisions of Section 271(l)(c) of the Income Tax Act
which according to the assessee is identically worded to Section 11AC of the
Central Excise Act. The assessee has also placed reliance on a recent judgment
of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dilip N. Shroff v. Jt. CIT
2007 (8) SCALE 304, decided on 18th May, 2007.

5\. At this stage, we may mention that in the present cases, we are also
concerned with interpretation of Section 3A of the Central Excise Act and Rule
96ZQ(5) of the Central Excise Rules which refers to failure on the part of an
independent processor to pay duty by specified date. In this connection, it is
the case of the department that Clause (5) of Rule 96ZQ specifically refers to
payment of penalty equal to amount of duty outstanding from the assessee. It
is the case of the department that penalty under the said rule is also for
statutory offences; that it is not a case of imposition of penalty and that it
is not a case where the adjudicating authority has any discretion in the
matter of imposition of penalty. In this connection, reliance is placed by the
department on the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Chairman, SEBI v. Shriram Mutual Fund and Anr. . On the other hand, it is the
case of the assessee that even Rule 96ZQ(5) should be read down so as to
include the requirement of mens rea into Clause (5) of Rule 96ZQ particularly
when the said clause begins with the expression "if any independent processor
fails to pay the amount of duty". In this connection, the assessee once again
placed reliance on the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the
case of Dilip N. Shroff v. Jt. CIT (supra).

6\. We quote hereinbelow the provisions of Rule 96ZQ(5):

96ZQ. Procedure to be Mowed by the independent processor textile fabrics,

(l) to (4) (5) If an independent processor fails to pay the amount of duty or
any partthereof by the date specified in sub-r. (3), he shall be liable to.

(i) pay the outstanding amount of duty along with the interest at the rate of
thirty-six per cent per annum calculated for the outstanding period on the
outstanding amount; and

(ii) a penalty equal to an amount of duty outstanding from him or rupees five
thousand, whichever is greater.

We also quote hereinbelow the provisions of Section 11AC of the Central Excise
Act:

Section 11 AC. Penalty for short-levy or non-levy of duty in certain
cases.Where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-
levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded by reasons of fraud, collusion or
any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts, or contravention of any of
the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder with intent to
evade payment of duty, the person who is liable to pay duty as determined
under Sub-section (2) of Section 11A, shall also be liable to pay a penalty
equal to the duty so determined:

Provided that where the duty determined to be payable is reduced or increased
by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be,
the Court, then, for the purposes of this section, the duty as reduced or
increased, as the case may be, shall be taken into account.

We also quote hereinbelow Section 271(l)(c) of the Income Tax Act:

271\. Failure to furnish returns, comply with notices, concealment of income,
etc.(1) If the assessing officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) or the CIT in
the course of any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that any person

(a) and (b) ******

(c) has concealed the particulars of his income or furnished inaccurate
particulars of such income, he may direct that such person shall pay by way of
penalty,

(i) and (ii)

(iii) in the cases referred to in Clause (c) or Clause (d), in addition to
tax, if any, payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than, but which
shall not exceed three times, the amount of tax sought to be evaded by reason
of the concealment of particulars of his income or fringe benefits the
furnishing of inaccurate particulars of such income or fringe benefits:

Explanation 1.Where in respect of any facts material to the computation of the
total income of any person under this Act, (A) Such person fails to offer an
explanation or offers an explanation which is found by the assessing officer
or the Commissioner (Appeals) or the CIT to be false, or (B) such person
offers an explanation which he is not able to substantiate and fails to prove
that such explanation is bona fide and that all the facts relating to the same
and material to the computation of his total income have been disclosed by
him, then, the amount added or disallowed in computing the total income of
such person as a result thereof shall, for the purposes of Clause (c) of this
sub-section, be deemed to represent the income in respect of which particulars
have been concealed.

Explanation 2,Where the source of any receipt, deposit, outgoing or investment
in any assessment year is claimed by any person to be an amount which had been
added in computing the income or deducted in computing the loss in the
assessment of such person for any earlier assessment year or years but in
respect of which no penalty under Clause (iii) of this sub-section had been
levied, that part of the amount so added or deducted in such earlier
assessment year immediately preceding the year in which the receipt, deposit,
outgoing or investment appears (such earlier assessment year hereafter in this
Explanation referred to as the first preceding year) which is sufficient to
cover the amount represented by such receipt, deposit or outgoing or value of
such investment (such amount or value hereafter in this Explanation referred
to as the utilised amount) shall be treated as the income of the assessee,
particulars of which had been concealed or inaccurate particulars of which had
been furnished for the first preceding year; and where the amount so added or
deducted in the first preceding year is not sufficient to cover the utilised
amount, that part of the amount so added or deducted in the year immediately
preceding the first preceding year which is sufficient to cover such part of
the utilised amount as is not so covered shall be treated to be the income of
the assessee, particulars of which had been concealed or inaccurate
particulars of which had been furnished for the year immediately preceding the
first preceding year and so on, until the entire utilised amount is covered by
the amounts so added or deducted in such earlier assessment years.

Explanation 3. Where any person fails, without reasonable cause, to furnish
within the period specified in Sub-section (1) of Section 153 a return of his
income which he is required to furnish under Section 139 in respect of any
assessment year commencing on or after the 1-4-1989, and until the expiry of
the period aforesaid, no notice has been issued to him under Clause (i) of
Sub-section (1) of Section 142 or Section 148 and the assessing officer or the
Commissioner (Appeals) is satisfied that in respect of such assessment year
such person has taxable income, then, such person shall, for the purposes of
Clause (c) of this sub-section, be deemed to have concealed the particulars of
his income in respect of such assessment year, notwithstanding that such
person furnishes a return of his income at any time after the expiry of the
period aforesaid in pursuance of a notice under Section 148.

Explanation 4 For the purposes of Clause (iii) of this sub-section, the
expression 'the amount of tax sought to be evaded',

(a) in any case where the amount of income in respect of which particulars
have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been furnished has the
effect of reducing the loss declared in the return or converting that loss
into income, means the tax that would have been chargeable on the income in
respect of which particulars have been concealed or inaccurate particulars
have been furnished had such income been the total income;

(b) in any case to which Expln. 3 applies, means the tax on the total income
assessed;

(c) in any other case, means the difference between the tax on the total
income assessed and the tax that would have been chargeable had such total
income been reduced by the amount of income in respect of which particulars
have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been furnished.

Explanation 5.Where in the course of a search under Section 132, the assessee
is found to be the owner of any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable
article or thing (hereafter in this Explanation referred to as assets) and the
assessee claims that such assets have been acquired by him by utilising
(wholly or in part) his income,

(a) for any previous year which has ended before the date of the search, but
the return of income for such year has not been furnished before the said date
or, where such return has been furnished before the said date, such income has
not been declared therein; or

(b) for any previous year which is to end on or after the date of the search,
then, notwithstanding that such income is declared by him in any return of
income furnished on or after the date of the search, he shall, for the
purposes of imposition of a penalty under Clause (c) of Sub-section (1) of
this section, be deemed to have concealed the particulars of his income or
furnished inaccurate particulars of such income, unless, (1) such income is,
or the transactions resulting in such income are recorded,

(i) in a case falling Under Clause (a), before the date of the search; and

(ii) in a case falling under Clause (b), on or before such date, in the books
of account, if any, maintained by him for any source of income or such income
is otherwise disclosed to the Chief CIT or CIT before the said date; or (2)
he, in the course of the search, makes a statement under Sub-section (4) of
Section 132 that any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or
thing found in hispossession or under his control, has been acquired out of
his income which hasnot been disclosed so far in his return of income to be
furnished before theexpiry of time specified in Sub-section (1) of Section
139, and also specifies in thestatement the manner in which such income has
been derived and pays thetax, together with interest, if any, in respect of
such income.

Explanation 6.Where any adjustment is made in the income or loss declared in
the return under the proviso to Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 143
and additional tax charged under that section, the provisions of this sub-
section shall not apply in relation to the adjustment so made, Explanation
7.Where in the case of an assessee who has entered into an international
transaction defined in Section 92B, any amount is added or disallowed in
computing the total income under Sub-section (4) of Section 92C, then, the
amount so added or disallowed shall, for the purposes of Clause (c) of this
sub-section, be deemed to represent the income in respect of which particulars
have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been furnished, unless the
assessee proves to the satisfaction of the assessing officer or the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the CIT that the price charged or paid in such
transaction was computed in accordance with the provisions contained in
Section 92C and in the manner prescribed under the it section, in good faith
and with due diligence.

7\. In our view, the basic scheme for imposition of penalty under Section
271(l)(c) of the Income Tax Act, Section 11AC of the Central Excise Act and
Rule 96ZQ(5) of the Central Excise Rules is common. We have gone through the
judgment of the Division Bench dated 18-5-2007 in the case of Dilip N. Shroff
v. Jt. CIT (supra).

8\. We are of the view that there is a conflict of opinions between the
judgments of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dilip N. Shroff
v. Jt. CIT (supra) on one hand and on the other hand we have another judgment
of this Court in the case of Chairman, SEBI v. Shriram Mutual Fund and Anr.
(supra). Secondly, it may be pointed out that the object behind enactment of
Section 271(l)(c) read with the Explanations quoted above indicates that the
said section has been enacted to provide for a remedy for loss of revenue. The
penalty under the said section is a civD liability. Wilful concealment is not
an essential ingredient for attracting the civil liability as is the case in
the matter of prosecution under Section 276C of the Act. While considering an
appeal against an order made under Section 271(l)(c) what is required to be
examined is the record which the officer imposing the penalty had before him
and if that record can sustain the finding there had been concealment, that
would be sufficient to sustain the penalty. Keeping in mind these two
circumstances, we are of the view that the judgment of the Division Bench in
the case Dilip N. Shroff v. Jt. CIT (supra) needs consideration. The
Explanations added to Section 271(l)(c) in that entirety also indicate the
element of strict Liability on the assessee for concealment or for giving
inaccurate particulars while filing returns. The judgment in Dilip N. Shroff's
case (supra) has also not considered the provisions of Section 276C of the
Income Tax Act. Therefore, in our view, the; judgment in the case of Dilip N.
Shroff v. Jt. CIT (supra) needs consideration by the larger Bench of this
Court particularly when it has ramifications not only regarding provisions of
the Income Tax Act but also with regard to the provisions of Sections 3A and
11 AC of the Central Excise Act and Rule 96ZQ(5) of the Central Excise Rules.

9\. For the aforestated reasons, we direct the Registry to place our order in
this batch of civil appeals before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India for
appropriate directions.

10\. Before concluding, we may mention that in the present cases, the assessee
had challenged the vires of Rule 96ZQ(5). By the impugned judgment, the
Gujarat High court has read down the said rule incorporating the mens rea
requirement. It is made clear that if the larger Bench takes a view to say
that the penalty under the said clause is mandatory, then it would still be
open to the assessee to challenge the vires of the said Rule 96ZQ(5) and,
therefore, in that event, the matter has to be kept before the Division Bench
for passing appropriate orders.

