

Supreme Court of India

Kasinka Trading And Another, Etc. ... vs Union Of India And Another on 18
October, 1994

Equivalent citations: AIR 1995 SC 874, 1995 (50) ECC 31, 1994 ECR 637 SC, 1994
(74) ELT 782 SC, JT 1994 (7) SC 362, 1994 (4) SCALE 806, (1995) 1 SCC 274,
1994 Supp 4 SCR 448

Author: A Anand

Bench: M V I., . A Anand

ORDER A.S. Anand, J.

1\. Leave granted in (C.A. Nos. 6983, 6984 & 6985 of 1994) SLP (c) Nos. 7370,
12304/83 and 725/84.

2\. These two batches of appeals by special leave are directed against the
judgment of the High Court of Delhi dismissing the writ petitions filed by the
appellants, challenging the action of the Union of India in withdrawing a time
bound exemption Notification No. 66 dated 15.3.1979 for the import of PVC
resins. Notification No. 66 dated 15.3.1979 reads as follows:

NOTIFICATION PVC resins are exempt from basic import duty. 66 - Cus. Dt.
15.3.1979 as amendment by 1780Cus. Dt. 29.8.79, 37 - Cus. dt. 25.3.80.

G.S.R. - In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1) of Section 25
of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962). and in supersession of the Notification
of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue,
No. 145 - Customs dated 27th July 1978, the Central Government, being
satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, hereby exempts
polyvinyl chloride resins, falling within chapter 39 of the First Schedule to
the Customs Tariff Act 1975 (51 of 1975) when imported into India, from the
whole of the duty of Customs Leviable therein which is specified in the said
First Schedule.

This Notification shall be in force upto and inclusive of 31st March 1981.

3\. Before the expiry of the time fixed in the Notification i.e. 31.3.1980 the
withdrawal notification bearing No. 205 dt. 16.10.80 was issued which reads as
follows :

New Delhi the 16th Oct. 1980 24th Asvina 1902 (SAKA) NOTIFICATION CUSTOMS
G.S.R. In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1) of Section 25 of
the Customs Act, 1962(52 of 1962) and in supersession of the Notification of
the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue No.
66 Customs, dated the 15th March 1979, the Central Government, being satisfied
that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, hereby exempts polyvinyl
chloride resins, falling within chapter 39 of the First Schedule to the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), when imported into India, from so much
of the duty of customs leviable thereon which is specified in the said First
Schedule as is in excess four percent ad-volorem.

Sd/- (K. Chandramouli) Under Secretary to the Govt. of India No. 205/F. No.
355/141/89/Cus. 1.

Attested (V.K. Mulick) Asstt. Collector of Customs, Correspondence Deptt.

4\. The appellants, in these appeals, invoking the doctrine of promissory
estoppel have urged that the Central Government could not have withdrawn the
exemption before 31.3.1981, because relying on the exemption Notification, the
appellants had placed orders for the import of PVC resin on the understanding
that the PVC resin was totally exempt from customs duty. It is argued that the
Government must be held bound by the representation it had made in the
exemption Notification and it was estopped on the basis of the promissory
estoppel to go back on its promise. Reliance has been placed on various
judgments of this Court in support of the argument that the doctrine of
promissory estoppel can be invoked to bind the Government to its promise. We
shall refer to the judgments at the appropriate place in this Judgment.

5\. The respondents have supported the judgment of the High Court and urged
that though the doctrine of promissory estoppel can in appropriate cases be
invoked against the Government to bind it to its promise, the doctrine,
however, has no application to the present appeals because to the exemption
had been withdrawn in 'public interest' and the individual interest must give
way to the public interest. It is urged that the doctrine, being a product of
equity, most give way when equity so demands. Argued Mr. Ganguli, learned
senior counsel appearing for the respondents, that the doctrine of promissory
estoppel cannot operate against the State to the detriment of the society at
large. If the Government after a review of its policy finds that modification,
alteration or supersession is required, in its earlier policy, in the larger
public interest, the courts cannot debar it from reviewing its policy, except
in cases, where the subsequent act of the Government can be shown not to be in
public interest. The Government, it is urged, must be given a free hand to
determine the priorities and unless it can be established that while
functioning in its sovereign, government or public capacity, as distinct from
its executive or commercial capacity, its action is not bonafide or is
actuated extraneous consideration, the courts will not allow a party to invoke
the doctrine of promissory estoppel against the Government. It is submitted
that the Notification No. 66 of 1979 had been superseded in the public
interest for good and valid reasons and the judgment of the High Court did not
call for any interference.

6\. The Customs Act 1962 consolidates and amends the law relating to customs
spread over in the Sea Customs Act 1878, the Land Customs Act 1924 and the
Indian Aircraft Act 1934\. The Act with came into force on February 1, 1963
seeks to codify the entire law relating to sea, land, and air customs into a
single comprehensive measure. Customs duties or tariffs are legal duties
levied on the transit of goods from one country to another. They are both the
source of revenue to the State as well as regulatory measures to protect and
promote indigenous industries and trade. The Customs Tariff Act 1975, was
enacted by the Parliament, with a view to consolidating and amending the law
relating to customs duties as complimentary to the Act. Section 57 of the
Customs Act confers upon the Central Board of Excise and Customs the power to
make regulations consistent with, and the rules to generally to carry out the
purposes of, the Act. Sub-section (2) thereof particularises certain matters
with respect to which regulations can be made. The specification of certain
matters in Sub-section (2) is of course without prejudice to the generality of
the power conferred by Sub-section (1). Section 156 of the Act confers upon
the Central Government the power to make rules consistent with the Act
generally to carry out the purposes of the Act and Sub-section (2) of Section
156 specifies the matters with respect to which rules can be made. The
specification in Sub-section (2) is also without prejudice to the generality
of the power conferred by Sub-section (1).

7\. The Parliament has designated two authorities i.e. Central Government and
the Central Board of Excise and Customs to make rules/regulations to carry out
the purposes of the Act generally. The character of rules and the regulations
made under Sections 156 and 157 respectively is the same, namely, they
constitute delegated legislation.

8\. Section 12 of the Customs Act, which is the charging section, provides
that duties of customs shall be levied at such rates as may be specified under
the Customs Tariff Act 1975 or any other law for the time being in force on
the goods imported into India. Section 2 of the Customs Tariff Act 1975 read
with the First and Second Schedule thereto lays down the rates at which duties
of customs shall be levied under the Customs Act on various goods imported
into India. Section 25 of the Act, with which we are primarily concerned in
this batch of appeals, confers powers on the Central Government to grant
exemptions from levy of duty in "public interest". Sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 25 which are relevant for our purposes provide as under :

Power to grant exemption from duty -

(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public
interest so to do it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt
generally either absolutely or subject to such conditions (to be fulfilled
before or after clearance) as may be specified in the notification goods of
any specified description from the whole or any part of duty of customs
leviable therein.

(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public
interest so to do, it may, by special order in each case, exempt from the
payment of duty, under circumstances of an exceptional natural to be stated in
such order, any good on which duty is leviable.

9\. The power to grant exemption from duty, wholly or in part, on the plain
language of Section 25 (supra) is contingent upon the satisfaction of the
Government that it would be in "public interest' to do so. Thus, "public
interest" is the guiding criteria for exercising the power under Section 25
(Supra).

10\. Having noticed the background and the relevant provisions as also two
Notifications, it shall now be appropriate to refer in brief to the facts of
the cases before us. For the sake of convenience, we shall refer to the facts
of the case as appearing in the Paper Book of Kasinak Trading and Ors. v.
Union of India and Ors. C.A. No. 4336/93. The appellants are importers of
P.V.C. resins which at the relevant time were chargeable to basic customs duty
under Tariff Entry No. 39. 01/06 of the Customs Tariff Act Act 1975 read with
Customs Act 1962\. In addition to it, the import of PVC resins is also
chargeable to auxilliary duty, additional duty and special duty of customs.
Respondent No. 1 issued Notification No. 66 dated 15.3.1979 under Section 25
of the Customs Act 1962, exempting PVC resins from the whole of the basic
customs duty payable on the import of PVC resins till 31st March 1981. The
appellants say that they had placed indents with their indenting agents for
the import of PVC resins on the basis of the representation that the exemption
as granted by the Notification dated 15th March 1979 would continue to remain
effective till 31st March 1981, but Respondent Nos. 2 issued another
Notification bearing No. 205 dated 16th October 1980 (supra) (hereinafter
withdrawal Notification) purporting to supersede Notification No. 66 dated
15th March 1979, before its expiry date i.e. before 31st March 1981. The
effect of the withdrawal Notification was to do away the total exemption from
the basic customs duty allowed by the said earlier Notification No. 66 dated
15th March 1979, and instead to direct levy of 40% basic customs duty on the
imports of PVC resins. The grievance of the appellants is that they had placed
orders for the import of PVC resins on the basis of the exemption granted
under Notification No. 66 dated 15th March 1979 which was to remain in force
till 31st March 1981 and had so adjusted their affairs, that if they are
compelled to pay basic customs duty at the rate of 40% ad valorem in respect
of their orders for the import of PVC resins they would suffer a great loss
since their goods arrived in India before 31st March 1981 but after the date
of withdrawal of the exemption Notification by the Notification dated
16.10.1980. Aggrieved by the issuance of notification dated 16th October 1980
superseding the Notification dated 15th March 1979, the appellants filed a
writ petition (CWP No. 1671 of 1980) in the High Court of Delhi invoking the
doctrine of promissory estoppel and praying for a direction to quash the
withdrawal Notification to the extent that it superseded the earlier
Notification before, the expiry of the date i.e. 31st March 1981 and a
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court vide its judgment and order dated 16th
March 1983 dismissed the same.

11\. Can the appellants invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel in the
facts and circumstances of these cases, is therefore, the pivotal question
requiring our consideration?

12\. The doctrine of promissory estoppel or equitable estoppel is well
established in the administrative law of the country. To put it simply, the
doctrine represents a principle evolved by equity to avoid injustice. The
basis of the doctrine is that where any party has by his word or conduct made
to the other party an unequivocal promise or representation by word or
conduct, which intended to create legal relations or effect a legal
relationship to arise in the future, knowing as well as intending that the
representation, assurance of the promise would be acted upon by the other
party to whom it has been made and has in fact been so acted upon by the other
party, the promise, assurance or representation should be binding on the party
making it and that party should not be permitted to go back upon it, if it
would be inequitable to allow him to do so, having regard to the dealing,
which have taken place or are intended to take between the parties.

13\. It has been settled by the Court that the doctrine of promissory estoppel
is applicable against the Government also particularly where it is necessary
to prevent fraud or manifest injustice. The doctrine, however, cannot be
pressed into aid to compel the Government or the public authority "to carry
out a representation or promise which is contrary to law or which was outside
the authority or power of the officer of the Government or of the public
authority to make." There is preponderance of judicial opinion that to invoke
the doctrine of promissory estoppel clear sound and positive foundation must
be laid in the petition itself by the party invoking the doctrine and that
bald expressions, without any supporting material, to the effect that the
doctrine is attracted because the party invoking the doctrine has altered its
position relying on the assurance of the Government would not be sufficient to
press into aid the doctrine. In our opinion, the doctrine of promissory
estoppel cannot be invoked in the abstract and the courts are bound to
consider all aspect including the results sought to be achieved and the public
good at large, because while considering the applicability of the doctrine,
the courts have to do equity and the fundamental principles of equity must for
ever be present to the mind of the court, while considering the applicability
of the doctrine. The doctrine must yield when the equity so demands if it can
be shown having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case that it
would be inequitable to hold the Government or the public authority to its
promise, assurance or representation.

14\. The ambit, scope and amplitude of the doctrine of promissory estoppel has
been evolved in this country over the last quarter of a century through
successive decision of this Court starting with Union of India v. Anglo Afgan
Agencies Pvt. Limited . Reference in this connection may be made with
advantage to Century Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. and Anr. v. The
Ulhasnagar Municipal Council and Anr. : Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. (P)
Ltd. v. State of UP and Ors. : Jit Ram Shiv Kumar and Ors. etc v. State of
Haryana and Anr. : Union of India v. Godfrey Philips India Ltd. : Indian
Express Newspapers (Bom) Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. :
Pornami Oil Mills and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Anr. [1986] Supp. SCC 728 :
Bakul Oil Industries and Anr. v. State of Gujarat and Anr. : Asst.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Ors v. Dharmendra Trading Co. and Ors. :
Amrit Banaspati Co. Ltd. and Anr. v. State of Punjab and Anr. and Union of
India and Ors. v. Hindustan Development Corporation and Ors. [1993] 3 JT SC
15. In Godfrey Philips India Limited (supra) this of Court opined:

We may also point out that the doctrine of promissory estoppel being an
equitable doctrine, it must yield when the equity so requires, if it can be
shown by the Government or public authority that having regard to the facts as
they have they have transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the Government
or Public authority to the promise of representation made by it, the Court
would not raise an equity in favour of the person to whom the promise or
representation is made and enforce the promise or representation against the
Government or Public authority. The doctrine of promissory estoppel would be
displaced in such a case, because on the facts, equity would not require that
the Government or Public authority should be bound by the promise or
representation made by it.

In Excise Commissioner U.P. Allahabad etc. etc. v. Ram Kumar etc. etc. four
learned Judges of this Court observed :

The fact that sales of country liquor had been exempted from sales tax vide
Notification No. ST 1149/X-802 (33)- 51 dated April 6,1959 could not operate
as an estoppel against the State Government and preclude it from subjecting
the sales to tax if it felt impelled to do so in the interest of the Revenues
of the State which are required for execution of the plans designed to meet
the ever increasing pressing needs of the developing society. It is now well
settled by catena of decisions that there can be no question of estoppel
against the Government in the exercise of its legislative, sovereign or
executive powers.

Prof. S.A. De Smith in his celebrated treatise "Judicial Review of
Administrative Action", 3rd Edn. at p.279 sums up the position thus :
"Contracts and Covenants entered into by the Crown are not to be construed as
being subject to implied terms that would exclude the exercise of general
discretionary powers for the public good : On the contrary they are to be
construed as incorporating an implied term that such powers remain
exercisable. This is broadly true of other public authorities also. But the
status and functions of the Crown in this regard are of a higher order. This
Crown cannot be allowed to tie its hands completely by prior undertakings is
as clear as the proposition that the Courts cannot allow the Crown to evade
compliance with ostensibly binding obligations whenever it thinks fit: If a
public authority lawfully repudiates or departs from the terms of a binding
contract in order to have been bound in law by an ostensibly binding contract
because the undertakings would improperly fetter its general discretionary
powers the other party to the agreement has no right whatsoever to damages or
compensation under the general law, no matter how serious the damages that
part may have suffered.

15\. In Subhash Photographies v. Union of India . Jeevan Reddy, J. Speaking
for the Bench observed :

In Statutes like Customs Act and Customs Tariff Act one has also to keep in
mind that such legislation can be properly administered only by constantly
adjusting it to the needs of the situation. This calls for a goods amount of
discretion to be allowed to the delegate. As is often pointed out 'flexibility
is essential (in law-making) and it is one of the advantages of rules and
regulations that they can be altered much more quickly and easily than can
Acts of Parliament." We have pointed out hereinbefore the necessity of
constant and continuous monitoring of the nation's economy by the Government
(and its various institutions) and the relevance of these enactments as a
means of ensuring a proper and healthy growth.

The learned Judge went on to opine :

The Parliament has appointed two authorities i.e., Central Government and the
Board to make rules/regulations to carry out the purposes of the Act
generally. The character of Rules and of the Regulations made under Sections
156 and 157 respectively is the same - both constitute delegated legislation.
The Regulations are subject to an additional limitation viz., they should not
be contrary to the Rules made under Section 156. The purpose of Sub-section
(2) in both the sections is inter alia to allocate certain matters to each of
them exclusively; subject to these Sub-sections, both the delegates can
exercise the power vested in them for carrying out the purposes of the Act. No
established legislative practice of any consideration duration has been
brought to our notice to read any further limitation into the regulation-
making power under Section 157, assuming that a legislative practice can be
read as a limitation.

16\. In M.P. Sugar Mills case (supra) it was observed that the doctrine of
promissory estoppel would not apply in the teeth of an obligation or liability
imposed by law and that there can be no promissory estoppel against the
exercise of legislative power.

17\. Coming now to the facts of the cases before us, we shall first take up
for consideration whether any enforceable promise had been held out to the
appellants, through Notification No. 66 dated 15.3.1979, and whether the Union
of India can be estopped from superseding that Notification by Notification
No. 205 dated 16.10.1980, withdrawing the exemption granted by the 1979
Notification.

18\. The appellants in this batch of cases are manufacturers of certain
products, requiring PVC resin as one of the raw material for the manufacturing
process. PVC resin, it is not disputed, is manufactured in India and is also
imported from abroad. In the counter to the Writ Petition filed by the Union
of India in the High Court, the justification for the issuance of the
exemption Notification No. 66/79 in the "public interest" was spelt out by the
respondents. It was stated that it was with a view to equalising sale prices
of the indigenous and the imported material and to make the commodity
available to the consumer at a uniform price, keeping in view the trends in
the supply of the material, that the Cabinet had decided to issue the
exemption Notification No. 66 of 1979 under Section 25(1) of the Act.
Subsequently, when it was found and realised that the international prices of
the product were falling and consequently the import prices had become lower
than the ex-factory prices of the indigenous material, the matter was examined
by the Government of India and it was decided in "public interest" to withdraw
the exemption Notification. Thus, the Union of India has disclosed the
circumstances under which the exemption was initially granted as well as the
change of circumstances which warranted the withdrawal of the exemption
notification. The reasons given by the Union of India justifying withdrawal of
the exemption notification, in our opinion, are not irrelevant to the exercise
of the power in 'public interest', nor are the same shown to be insufficient
to support the exercise of that power. From the material on the record it is
apparent that the exemption Notification issued under Section 25(1) of the
Act, in "public interest", was designed to off set the excess price which the
local entrepreneurs were required to pay for importing PVC resin at a time
when the difference between the indigenous product and the imported product
was substantial. No importer could be expected to import PVC resins after
paying duty and incur losses. The exemption Notification, was therefore,
issued with a view to off set losses to the extent possible. The exemption
Notification was not issued as a potential source of extra profit for the
importer. Again, at the time when the Notification was withdrawn by the
Government there was no scope for any loss to be suffered by the importers as
was clearly stated in the counter filed by the Union of India and which
contention has remained unrebutted. From the counter filed by the Union of
India in the High Court it is abundantly clear that the necessity for the
continuation of the exemption, in view of the changed circumstances, was no
longer necessary. The exemption Notification did not hold out to the
appellants any enforceable promise.

19\. The facts of the appeals before us are not analogous to the facts in
Anglo Afgan Agencies (supra) or M.P. Sugar Mills (supra). In the first case
the petitioner therein had acted upon the unequivocal promises held out to it
and exported goods on the specific assurance given to it and it was in that
fact situation that it was held that Textile Commissioner who had enunciated
the scheme was bound by the assurance thereof and obliged to carry out the
promise made thereunder. As already noticed, in the present batch of cases
neither the Notification is of an executive character nor does it represent a
scheme designed to achieve a particular purpose. It was a Notification issued
in public interest and again withdrawn in public interest. So far as the
second case (MP Sugar Mills case) is concerned the facts were totally
different. In the correspondence exchanged between the State and the
petitioners therein it was held out to the petitioners that the industry would
be exempted from sales tax for a particular number of initial years but when
the State sought to levy the sales tax it was held by this Court that it was
precluded from doing so because of the categorical representation made by it
to the petitioners through letters in writing, who had relied upon the same
and set up the industry.

20\. The power to grant exemption from payment of duty, additional duty etc.
under the Act, as already noticed flows from the provisions of Section 25(1)
of the Act. The power to exempt includes the power to modify or withdraw the
same. The liability to pay customs duty or additional duty under the Act
arises when the taxable event occurs. They are then subject to the payment of
duty as prevalent on the date of the entry of the goods. An exemption
notification issued under Section 25 of the Act had the effect of suspending
the collection of Customs duty. It does not make items which are subject to
levy of customs duty etc. as items not leviable to such duty. It only suspends
the levy and collection of customs duty etc., wholly or partially and subject
to such conditions as may be laid down in the Notification by the Government
in "public interest". Such an exemption by its very nature is susceptible of
being revoked or modified or subjected to other conditions. The supersession
or revocation of an exemption notification, in the "public interest", is an
exercise of the statutory power of the State under the law itself as is
obvious from the language of Section 25 of the Act. Under the General Clauses
Act an authority which has the power to issue a notification has the undoubted
power to rescind or modify the notification in a like manner. From the very
nature of power of exemption granted to the Government under Section 25 of the
Act, it follows that the same is with a view to enabling the Government to
regulate, control and promote the industries and industrial production in the
country. Notification No. 66 of 1979 in our opinion, was not designed or
issued to induce the appellants to import PVC resin. Admittedly, the said
Notification was not even intended as an incentive for import. The
Notification on the plain language of it was conceived and issued on the
Central Government "being satisfied that it is necessary in the public
interest so to do." Strictly speaking, therefore, the Notification cannot be
said to have extended any "representation" much less a "promise" to a party
getting the benefit of it to enable it to invoke the doctrine of promissory
estoppel against the State. It would bear repetition that in order to invoke
the doctrine of promissory estoppel, it is necessary that the promise which is
sought to be enforced must be shown to be an unequivocal promise to the other
party intended to create a legal relationship and that it was acted upon as
such by the party to whom the same was made. A Notification issued under
Section 25 of the Act cannot be said to be holding out of any such unequivocal
promise by the Government which was intended to create any legal relationship
between the Government and the party drawing benefit flowing from of the said
Notification. It is, therefore, futile to contend that even if the public
interest so demanded and the Central Government was satisfied that the
exemption did not require to be extended any further, it could still not
withdraw the exemption.

21\. The argument on behalf of the appellants, vehemently pressed by Mr.
Ashoke Desai and Mr. Harish Salve, their learned senior advocates, is to the
effect that since the Notification 66/79 had itself indicated that it shall be
operative till 31st March 1981, the Government could not withdraw the same
before the expiry of the date. It was argued that the appellants had placed
orders for the import of PVC resin relying upon the exemption Notification on
the understanding that it was to remain operative till 31st March 1981 and had
made arrangements for importing the goods accordingly and they could not be
prejudiced by the withdrawal of that Notification before 31st March 1981. We
cannot persuade ourselves to accept this submission of the learned Counsel.
Merely by mentioning the date as 31st March 1981, as the date upto which the
exemption Notification No. 66/79 was to be operative, no unequivocal
representation could be said to have been made that it could not be rescinded
or modified before that date even if the Government was satisfied that it was
necessary in the public interest to rescind it. Since, the Notification had
been issued under Section 25(1) of the Act, the very same power was available
to the authority for rescinding or modifying that Notification and the
appellant ought to have know that the said notification was capable of or
liable to be revoked, modified or rescinded at any time even before the expiry
of 31st March 1981 if the 'public interest' so demanded. To hold that after
the Government had issued the notification 66/79 indicating that it was to
remain operative till 31st March 1981, it could not be rescinded or modified
before the expiry of that date would amount to prohibiting the Government from
discharging its statutory obligation under Section 25(1) of the Act, if it was
satisfied that it was in the "public interest" to withdraw, modify or rescind
the earlier Notification. The plain language of Section 25 of the Act is
indicative of the position that it is the public interest and public interest
alone which is the dominant factor. It is not the case of the appellants that
the withdrawal of Notification 66/79 by the impugned Notification was not
'public interest'. Their case, however, is that relying upon the earlier
Notifications they had acted and the Government should not be permitted to go
back on its assurance as otherwise they would be put to huge loss. The courts
have to balance the equities between the parties and indeed the courts would
bind the Government by its promise "to prevent manifest injustice or fraud."
The following observations from Malhotra & Sons v. Union of India AIR (1976) J
& K 41 have been noticed with approval by this Court in Excise Commissioner v.
Ram Kumar and in M.P. Sugar Mills case (supra) :

The courts will only bind the Government by its promises to prevent manifest
injustice or fraud and will not make the Government a slave of its policy for
all times to come when the Government acts in its governmental, public or
sovereign capacity.

22\. The burden of customs duty etc. is passed on to the consumer and
therefore the question of the appellants being put to a huge loss is not
understandable. No injustice has been done much less fraud practised by the
Government in withdrawing the exemption.

23\. The appellants appear to be under the impression that even if, in the
altered market conditions the continuance of the exemption may not have been
justified, yet, Government was bound to continue it to give extra profit to
them. That certainly was not the object with which the Notification had been
issued. The withdrawal of exemption "in public interest" is a matter of policy
and the court would not bind the Government to its policy decisions for all
times to come, irrespective of the satisfaction of the Government that a
change in the policy was necessary in the "public interest". The courts, do
not interfere with the fiscal policy where the Government acts in "public
interest" and neither any fraud or lack of bonafides is alleged much less
established. The Government has to be left free to determine the priorities in
the matter of utilisation of finances and to act in the public interest while
issuing or modifying or withdrawing an exemption Notification under Section
25(1) of the Act.

24\. It needs no emphasis that the power of exemption under Section 25(1) of
the Act has been granted to the Government by the Legislature which a view to
enabling it to regulate, control and promote the industries and industrial
productions in the country. Where the Government on the basis of the material
available before it, bonafide, is satisfied that the "public interest" would
be served by either granting exemption or by withdrawing, modifying or
rescinding an exemption already granted, it should be allowed a free hand to
do so. We are unable to agree with the learned Counsel for the appellants that
Notification 66/79 could not be withdrawn before 31.3.1981. First, because the
exemption Notification having been issued under Section 25(1) of the Act, it
was implicit in it that it could be rescinded or modified at any time if the
public interest so demands and secondly it is not permissible to postpone the
compulsions of "public interest" till after 31st March 1981 if the Government
is satisfied as to the change in the circumstances before that date. Since,
the Government in the instant case was satisfied that the very public interest
which had demanded a total exemption from payment of customs duty now demanded
that the exemption should be withdrawn it was free to act in the manner it
did. It would bear a notice that though Notification 66/79 was initially valid
only upto 31st March 1979 but that date was extended in "public interest", we
see no reason why it could not be curtailed in public interest. Individual
interest must yield in favour of societal interest.

25\. In our considered opinion therefore, the High Court was perfectly right
in holding that the doctrine of promissory estoppel had no application to the
impugned notification issued by the Central Government in exercise of its
powers under Section 25(1) of the Act in view of the facts and circumstances,
as established on the record.

26\. So far as the second batch of cases is concerned the facts of C.A. Nos.
4333-34/83 need be noticed. These two appeals have been filed against the
judgment and order dated 3rd March 1983 of the High Court of Delhi. The
appellants in these two appeals are engaged in the manufacture of aluminium
conductors and aluminum conductors steel reinforced which are supplied to the
various State Electricity Boards. Aluminum ingots and rods are the basic raw
materials used in the production of such conductOrs. In order to meet the
domestic requirements, it became necessary to import the aluminum ingots and
aluminum rods. The Central Government therefore issued Notification No.
79-Cus. dated 18.4.1980 exempting aluminum wire rods and aluminum ingots from
the whole of customs duty as well as the additional duty leviable on it. The
notification contained the clause that the notification shall remain in force
till 30.9.1980. Simultaneously, another Notification No. 80-Cus. was issued by
the Central Government exempting the above items from the whole of auxiliary
duty as well. The appellants claim that on the basis of the promises and
assurance contained in the two exemption Notifications, they commenced
negotiations with the manufacturer and suppliers of the above items for the
purchase of these items from aboard. In the meantime, the Central Government
issued another Notification No. 174-Cus. dated 29.8.1980, withdrawing the
earlier Notification No. 79-Cus. dated 18.4.1980 and on the same date i.e.
29.8.1980 yet, another Notification was issued levying auxiliary duty @ 12 1/2
per cent ad valorem. Barely ten days after the rescind meant of the earlier
Notification, the Central Government issued another Notification No. 186-Cus.
dated 9.9.1980 once again exempting wire rods and aluminum ingots from the
whole of duty of customs. This notification was to remain operative till 31st
March 1981 and it has remained in force right through. The grievance of the
appellants is that the withdrawal of the exemption Notification on 29.8.1980
was not at all justified and support for this argument is sought from the fact
that within 10 days of the withdrawal notification, the Government had itself
once again issued a Notification on 9.9.1980, reviving the exemption of
customs duty. Learned counsel submitted that during the period of 10 days, the
importers whose goods arrived in India, were made liable to pay both the
customs duty as well as the auxiliary duty, while those whose goods arrived
either after 9.9.1980 or before 29.8.1980 were not required to pay the same.

27\. Indeed, the submission on the fact situation is not controvertible but in
the absence of any material placed before, the High Court or even in this
appeal to establish that the notification dated 29.8.1980 was issued for any
oblique or extraneous consideration and was not "in public interest", it is
not possible to find fault with that notification for the reasons we have
already given while dealing with the first batch of cases. The appellants, who
are in business, have to be prepared for tides in the business. In Poornami
Oil Mills (supra), it was the incentive to set up new industry in the State
with a view to boost the industrialisation that exemption had been granted and
it was in that fact situation that the doctrine of promissory estoppel was
held available to the appellant therein. Again in Bakul Oil Industries (supra)
it was the incentive to set up industries in a conforming area that the
exemption had been granted and the Court held that the Government could
withdrawn an exemption granted by it earlier only if such withdrawal could be
made without offending the rule of promissory estoppel and without depriving
an industry entitled to claim examination for the entire specified period for
which exemption had been promised to it at the time to giving incentive. Both
these cases therefore cannot advance the case of the appellant and are
distinguishable on facts because the exemption notification under Section 25
of the Act which was issued in this case did not hold out any incentive for
setting up of any industry to use PVC resins and on the other hand has been
issued in exercise of the statutory powers, in public interest and
subsequently withdrawn in exercise of the same powers again in public
interest. In our opinion, no justifiable prejudice was cause to the appellants
in the absence of any unequivocal promise by the Government not to act and
review its policy even if the necessity warranted and the "public interest" so
demanded. Thus, in the facts and circumstances of these cases, the appellants
cannot invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel to question the withdrawal
notification issued under Section 25 of the and Act.

28\. As a result of the above discussion, all the appeals fail and are
dismissed. No costs.

